Rhetoric 137
Book III
1
In making a speech one must study three points: ﬁrst, the
means of producing persuasion; second, the style, or language,
to be used; third, the proper arrangement of the various parts of
the speech. We have already speciﬁed the sources of persuasion.
We have shown that these are three in number; what they are; and
why there are only these three: for we have shown that persua-
sion must in every case be effected either (1) by working on the
emotions of the judges themselves, (2) by giving them the right
impression of the speakers’ character, or (3) by proving the truth
of the statements made.
Enthymemes also have been described, and the sources from
which they should be derived; there being both special and gene-
ral lines of argument for enthymemes.
Our next subject will be the style of expression. For it is not
enough to know what we ought to say; we must also say it as we
ought; much help is thus afforded towards producing the right im-
pression of a speech. The ﬁrst question to receive attention was
naturally the one that comes ﬁrst naturally-how persuasion can
be produced from the facts themselves. The second is how to set
these facts out in language. A third would be the proper method of
delivery; this is a thing that affects the success of a speech grea-
tly; but hitherto the subject has been neglected. Indeed, it was
long before it found a way into the arts of tragic drama and epic
recitation: at ﬁrst poets acted their tragedies themselves. It is plain
that delivery has just as much to do with oratory as with poetry.
(In connexion with poetry, it has been studied by Glaucon of Teos
among others.) It is, essentially, a matter of the right management
of the voice to express the various emotions-of speaking loudly,
softly, or between the two; of high, low, or intermediate pitch; of
the various rhythms that suit various subjects. These are the three
things-volume of sound, modulation of pitch, and rhythm-that a
speaker bears in mind. It is those who do bear them in mind who
www.bocc.ubi.pt
138 Aristotle
usually win prizes in the dramatic contests; and just as in drama
the actors now count for more than the poets, so it is in the contests
of public life, owing to the defects of our political institutions. No
systematic treatise upon the rules of delivery has yet been compo-
sed; indeed, even the study of language made no progress till late
in the day. Besides, delivery is-very properly-not regarded as an
elevated subject of inquiry. Still, the whole business of rhetoric
being concerned with appearances, we must pay attention to the
subject of delivery, unworthy though it is, because we cannot do
without it. The right thing in speaking really is that we should be
satisﬁed not to annoy our hearers, without trying to delight them:
we ought in fairness to ﬁght our case with no help beyond the bare
facts: nothing, therefore, should matter except the proof of those
facts. Still, as has been already said, other things affect the result
considerably, owing to the defects of our hearers. The arts of lan-
guage cannot help having a small but real importance, whatever it
is we have to expound to others: the way in which a thing is said
does affect its intelligibility. Not, however, so much importance
as people think. All such arts are fanciful and meant to charm the
hearer. Nobody uses ﬁne language when teaching geometry.
When the principles of delivery have been worked out, they
will produce the same effect as on the stage. But only very slight
attempts to deal with them have been made and by a few people,
as by Thrasymachus in his ’Appeals to Pity’. Dramatic ability
is a natural gift, and can hardly be systematically taught. The
principles of good diction can be so taught, and therefore we have
men of ability in this direction too, who win prizes in their turn,
as well as those speakers who excel in delivery-speeches of the
written or literary kind owe more of their effect to their direction
than to their thought.
It was naturally the poets who ﬁrst set the movement going;
for words represent things, and they had also the human voice at
their disposal, which of all our organs can best represent other
things. Thus the arts of recitation and acting were formed, and
others as well. Now it was because poets seemed to win fame
www.bocc.ubi.pt
Rhetoric 139
through their ﬁne language when their thoughts were simple enough,
that the language of oratorical prose at ﬁrst took a poetical colour,
e.g. that of Gorgias. Even now most uneducated people think that
poetical language makes the ﬁnest discourses. That is not true: the
language of prose is distinct from that of poetry. This is shown by
the state of things to-day, when even the language of tragedy has
altered its character. Just as iambics were adopted, instead of te-
trameters, because they are the most prose-like of all metres, so
tragedy has given up all those words, not used in ordinary talk,
which decorated the early drama and are still used by the writers
of hexameter poems. It is therefore ridiculous to imitate a poe-
tical manner which the poets themselves have dropped; and it is
now plain that we have not to treat in detail the whole question of
style, but may conﬁne ourselves to that part of it which concerns
our present subject, rhetoric. The other–the poetical–part of it has
been discussed in the treatise on the Art of Poetry.
2
We may, then, start from the observations there made, inclu-
ding the deﬁnition of style. Style to be good must be clear, as is
proved by the fact that speech which fails to convey a plain mea-
ning will fail to do just what speech has to do. It must also be ap-
propriate, avoiding both meanness and undue elevation; poetical
language is certainly free from meanness, but it is not appropriate
to prose. Clearness is secured by using the words (nouns and
verbs alike) that are current and ordinary. Freedom from mean-
ness, and positive adornment too, are secured by using the other
words mentioned in the Art of Poetry. Such variation from what is
usual makes the language appear more stately. People do not feel
towards strangers as they do towards their own countrymen, and
the same thing is true of their feeling for language. It is therefore
well to give to everyday speech an unfamiliar air: people like what
strikes them, and are struck by what is out of the way. In verse
such effects are common, and there they are ﬁtting: the persons
www.bocc.ubi.pt
140 Aristotle
and things there spoken of are comparatively remote from ordi-
nary life. In prose passages they are far less often ﬁtting because
the subject-matter is less exalted. Even in poetry, it is not quite
appropriate that ﬁne language should be used by a slave or a very
young man, or about very trivial subjects: even in poetry the style,
to be appropriate, must sometimes be toned down, though at other
times heightened. We can now see that a writer must disguise his
art and give the impression of speaking naturally and not artiﬁ-
cially. Naturalness is persuasive, artiﬁciality is the contrary; for
our hearers are prejudiced and think we have some design against
them, as if we were mixing their wines for them. It is like the dif-
ference between the quality of Theodorus’ voice and the voices of
all other actors: his really seems to be that of the character who
is speaking, theirs do not. We can hide our purpose successfully
by taking the single words of our composition from the speech of
ordinary life. This is done in poetry by Euripides, who was the
ﬁrst to show the way to his successors.
Language is composed of nouns and verbs. Nouns are of the
various kinds considered in the treatise on Poetry. Strange words,
compound words, and invented words must be used sparingly and
on few occasions: on what occasions we shall state later. The re-
ason for this restriction has been already indicated: they depart
from what is suitable, in the direction of excess. In the language
of prose, besides the regular and proper terms for things, meta-
phorical terms only can be used with advantage. This we gather
from the fact that these two classes of terms, the proper or regular
and the metaphorical-these and no others-are used by everybody
in conversation. We can now see that a good writer can produce
a style that is distinguished without being obtrusive, and is at the
same time clear, thus satisfying our deﬁnition of good oratorical
prose. Words of ambiguous meaning are chieﬂy useful to ena-
ble the sophist to mislead his hearers. Synonyms are useful to the
poet, by which I mean words whose ordinary meaning is the same,
e.g. ’porheueseai’ (advancing) and ’badizein’ (proceeding); these
two are ordinary words and have the same meaning.
www.bocc.ubi.pt
Rhetoric 141
In the Art of Poetry, as we have already said, will be found
deﬁnitions of these kinds of words; a classiﬁcation of Metaphors;
and mention of the fact that metaphor is of great value both in
poetry and in prose. Prose-writers must, however, pay specially
careful attention to metaphor, because their other resources are
scantier than those of poets. Metaphor, moreover, gives style
clearness, charm, and distinction as nothing else can: and it is
not a thing whose use can be taught by one man to another. Me-
taphors, like epithets, must be ﬁtting, which means that they must
fairly correspond to the thing signiﬁed: failing this, their inappro-
priateness will be conspicuous: the want of harmony between two
things is emphasized by their being placed side by side. It is like
having to ask ourselves what dress will suit an old man; certainly
not the crimson cloak that suits a young man. And if you wish to
pay a compliment, you must take your metaphor from something
better in the same line; if to disparage, from something worse.
To illustrate my meaning: since opposites are in the same class,
you do what I have suggested if you say that a man who begs
’prays’, and a man who prays ’begs’; for praying and begging
are both varieties of asking. So Iphicrates called Callias a ’men-
dicant priest’ instead of a ’torch-bearer’, and Callias replied that
Iphicrates must be uninitiated or he would have called him not
a ’mendicant priest’ but a ’torch-bearer’. Both are religious tit-
les, but one is honourable and the other is not. Again, somebody
calls actors ’hangers-on of Dionysus’, but they call themselves
’artists’: each of these terms is a metaphor, the one intended to
throw dirt at the actor, the other to dignify him. And pirates now
call themselves ’purveyors’. We can thus call a crime a mistake,
or a mistake a crime. We can say that a thief ’took’ a thing, or that
he ’plundered’ his victim. An expression like that of Euripides’
Telephus,
King of the oar, on Mysia’s coast he landed,
is inappropriate; the word ’king’ goes beyond the dignity of
the subject, and so the art is not concealed. A metaphor may be
amiss because the very syllables of the words conveying it fail to
www.bocc.ubi.pt
142 Aristotle
indicate sweetness of vocal utterance. Thus Dionysius the Brazen
in his elegies calls poetry ’Calliope’s screech’. Poetry and scree-
ching are both, to be sure, vocal utterances. But the metaphor
is bad, because the sounds of ’screeching’, unlike those of poe-
try, are discordant and unmeaning. Further, in using metaphors
to give names to nameless things, we must draw them not from
remote but from kindred and similar things, so that the kinship
is clearly perceived as soon as the words are said. Thus in the
celebrated riddle
I marked how a man glued bronze with ﬁre to another man’s
body,
the process is nameless; but both it and gluing are a kind of
application, and that is why the application of the cupping-glass
is here called a ’gluing’. Good riddles do, in general, provide
us with satisfactory metaphors: for metaphors imply riddles, and
therefore a good riddle can furnish a good metaphor. Further, the
materials of metaphors must be beautiful; and the beauty, like the
ugliness, of all words may, as Licymnius says, lie in their sound or
in their meaning. Further, there is a third consideration-one that
upsets the fallacious argument of the sophist Bryson, that there is
no such thing as foul language, because in whatever words you put
a given thing your meaning is the same. This is untrue. One term
may describe a thing more truly than another, may be more like
it, and set it more intimately before our eyes. Besides, two diffe-
rent words will represent a thing in two different lights; so on this
ground also one term must be held fairer or fouler than another.
For both of two terms will indicate what is fair, or what is foul, but
not simply their fairness or their foulness, or if so, at any rate not
in an equal degree. The materials of metaphor must be beautiful
to the ear, to the understanding, to the eye or some other physical
sense. It is better, for instance, to say ’rosy-ﬁngered morn’, than
’crimson-ﬁngered’ or, worse still, ’red-ﬁngered morn’. The epi-
thets that we apply, too, may have a bad and ugly aspect, as when
Orestes is called a ’mother-slayer’; or a better one, as when he is
called his ’father’s avenger’. Simonides, when the victor in the
www.bocc.ubi.pt
Rhetoric 143
mule-race offered him a small fee, refused to write him an ode,
because, he said, it was so unpleasant to write odes to half-asses:
but on receiving an adequate fee, he wrote
Hail to you, daughters of storm-footed steeds?
though of course they were daughters of asses too. The same
effect is attained by the use of diminutives, which make a bad
thing less bad and a good thing less good. Take, for instance, the
banter of Aristophanes in the Babylonians where he uses ’goldlet’
for ’gold’, ’cloaklet’ for ’cloak’, ’scofﬁet’ for ’scoff, and ’plague-
let’. But alike in using epithets and in using diminutives we must
be wary and must observe the mean.
3
Bad taste in language may take any of four forms: (1) The
misuse of compound words. Lycophron, for instance, talks of the
’many visaged heaven’ above the ’giant-crested earth’, and again
the ’strait-pathed shore’; and Gorgias of the ’pauper-poet ﬂatte-
rer’ and ’oath-breaking and over-oath-keeping’. Alcidamas uses
such expressions as ’the soul ﬁlling with rage and face becoming
ﬂame-ﬂushed’, and ’he thought their enthusiasm would be issue-
fraught’ and ’issue-fraught he made the persuasion of his words’,
and ’sombre-hued is the ﬂoor of the sea’.The way all these words
are compounded makes them, we feel, ﬁt for verse only. This,
then, is one form in which bad taste is shown.
(2) Another is the employment of strange words. For instance,
Lycophron talks of ’the prodigious Xerxes’ and ’spoliative Sci-
ron’; Alcidamas of ’a toy for poetry’ and ’the witlessness of na-
ture’, and says ’whetted with the unmitigated temper of his spirit’.
(3) A third form is the use of long, unseasonable, or frequent
epithets. It is appropriate enough for a poet to talk of ’white milk’,
in prose such epithets are sometimes lacking in appropriateness
or, when spread too thickly, plainly reveal the author turning his
prose into poetry. Of course we must use some epithets, since
they lift our style above the usual level and give it an air of dis-
tinction. But we must aim at the due mean, or the result will be
www.bocc.ubi.pt
144 Aristotle
worse than if we took no trouble at all; we shall get something
actually bad instead of something merely not good. That is why
the epithets of Alcidamas seem so tasteless; he does not use them
as the seasoning of the meat, but as the meat itself, so numerous
and swollen and aggressive are they. For instance, he does not say
’sweat’, but ’the moist sweat’; not ’to the Isthmian games’, but
’to the world-concourse of the Isthmian games’; not ’laws’, but
’the laws that are monarchs of states’; not ’at a run’, but ’his heart
impelling him to speed of foot’; not ’a school of the Muses’, but
’Nature’s school of the Muses had he inherited’; and so ’frowning
care of heart’, and ’achiever’ not of ’popularity’ but of ’univer-
sal popularity’, and ’dispenser of pleasure to his audience’, and
’he concealed it’ not ’with boughs’ but ’with boughs of the forest
trees’, and ’he clothed’ not ’his body’ but ’his body’s nakedness’,
and ’his soul’s desire was counter imitative’ (this’s at one and the
same time a compound and an epithet, so that it seems a poet’s ef-
fort), and ’so extravagant the excess of his wickedness’. We thus
see how the inappropriateness of such poetical language imports
absurdity and tastelessness into speeches, as well as the obscurity
that comes from all this verbosity-for when the sense is plain, you
only obscure and spoil its clearness by piling up words.
The ordinary use of compound words is where there is no term
for a thing and some compound can be easily formed, like ’pa-
stime’ (chronotribein); but if this is much done, the prose charac-
ter disappears entirely. We now see why the language of com-
pounds is just the thing for writers of dithyrambs, who love sono-
rous noises; strange words for writers of epic poetry, which is a
proud and stately affair; and metaphor for iambic verse, the metre
which (as has been already’ said) is widely used to-day.
(4) There remains the fourth region in which bad taste may be
shown, metaphor. Metaphors like other things may be inappro-
priate. Some are so because they are ridiculous; they are indeed
used by comic as well as tragic poets. Others are too grand and
theatrical; and these, if they are far-fetched, may also be obscure.
For instance, Gorgias talks of ’events that are green and full of
www.bocc.ubi.pt
Rhetoric 145
sap’, and says ’foul was the deed you sowed and evil the harvest
you reaped’. That is too much like poetry. Alcidamas, again, cal-
led philosophy ’a fortress that threatens the power of law’, and
the Odyssey ’a goodly looking-glass of human life’,’ talked about
’offering no such toy to poetry’: all these expressions fail, for the
reasons given, to carry the hearer with them. The address of Gor-
gias to the swallow, when she had let her droppings fall on him
as she ﬂew overhead, is in the best tragic manner. He said, ’Nay,
shame, O Philomela’. Considering her as a bird, you could not
call her act shameful; considering her as a girl, you could; and so
it was a good gibe to address her as what she was once and not as
what she is.
4
The Simile also is a metaphor; the difference is but slight.
When the poet says of Achilles that he
Leapt on the foe as a lion,
this is a simile; when he says of him ’the lion leapt’, it is a
metaphor-here, since both are courageous, he has transferred to
Achilles the name of ’lion’. Similes are useful in prose as well as
in verse; but not often, since they are of the nature of poetry. They
are to be employed just as metaphors are employed, since they are
really the same thing except for the difference mentioned.
The following are examples of similes. Androtion said of
Idrieus that he was like a terrier let off the chain, that ﬂies at you
and bites you-Idrieus too was savage now that he was let out of
his chains. Theodamas compared Archidamus to an Euxenus who
could not do geometry-a proportional simile, implying that Euxe-
nus is an Archidamus who can do geometry. In Plato’s Republic
those who strip the dead are compared to curs which bite the sto-
nes thrown at them but do not touch the thrower, and there is the
simile about the Athenian people, who are compared to a ship’s
captain who is strong but a little deaf; and the one about poets’
verses, which are likened to persons who lack beauty but pos-
sess youthful freshness-when the freshness has faded the charm
www.bocc.ubi.pt
146 Aristotle
perishes, and so with verses when broken up into prose. Peric-
les compared the Samians to children who take their pap but go
on crying; and the Boeotians to holm-oaks, because they were
ruining one another by civil wars just as one oak causes another
oak’s fall. Demosthenes said that the Athenian people were like
sea-sick men on board ship. Again, Demosthenes compared the
political orators to nurses who swallow the bit of food themselves
and then smear the children’s lips with the spittle. Antisthenes
compared the lean Cephisodotus to frankincense, because it was
his consumption that gave one pleasure. All these ideas may be
expressed either as similes or as metaphors; those which succeed
as metaphors will obviously do well also as similes, and similes,
with the explanation omitted, will appear as metaphors. But the
proportional metaphor must always apply reciprocally to either of
its co-ordinate terms. For instance, if a drinking-bowl is the shield
of Dionysus, a shield may ﬁttingly be called the drinking-bowl of
Ares.
5
Such, then, are the ingredients of which speech is composed.
The foundation of good style is correctness of language, which
falls under ﬁve heads. (1) First, the proper use of connecting
words, and the arrangement of them in the natural sequence which
some of them require. For instance, the connective ’men’ (e.g.
ego men) requires the correlative de (e.g. o de). The answering
word must be brought in before the ﬁrst has been forgotten, and
not be widely separated from it; nor, except in the few cases where
this is appropriate, is another connective to be introduced before
the one required. Consider the sentence, ’But as soon as he told
me (for Cleon had come begging and praying), took them along
and set out.’ In this sentence many connecting words are inserted
in front of the one required to complete the sense; and if there is
a long interval before ’set out’, the result is obscurity. One me-
rit, then, of good style lies in the right use of connecting words.
(2) The second lies in calling things by their own special names
www.bocc.ubi.pt
Rhetoric 147
and not by vague general ones. (3) The third is to avoid ambi-
guities; unless, indeed, you deﬁnitely desire to be ambiguous, as
those do who have nothing to say but are pretending to mean so-
mething. Such people are apt to put that sort of thing into verse.
Empedocles, for instance, by his long circumlocutions imposes
on his hearers; these are affected in the same way as most people
are when they listen to diviners, whose ambiguous utterances are
received with nods of acquiescence-
Croesus by crossing the Halys will ruin a mighty realm.
Diviners use these vague generalities about the matter in hand
because their predictions are thus, as a rule, less likely to be fal-
siﬁed. We are more likely to be right, in the game of ’odd and
even’, if we simply guess ’even’ or ’odd’ than if we guess at the
actual number; and the oracle-monger is more likely to be right
if he simply says that a thing will happen than if he says when it
will happen, and therefore he refuses to add a deﬁnite date. All
these ambiguities have the same sort of effect, and are to be avoi-
ded unless we have some such object as that mentioned. (4) A
fourth rule is to observe Protagoras’ classiﬁcation of nouns into
male, female, and inanimate; for these distinctions also must be
correctly given. ’Upon her arrival she said her say and departed (e
d elthousa kai dialechtheisa ocheto).’ (5) A ﬁfth rule is to express
plurality, fewness, and unity by the correct wording, e.g. ’Having
come, they struck me (oi d elthontes etupton me).’
It is a general rule that a written composition should be easy to
read and therefore easy to deliver. This cannot be so where there
are many connecting words or clauses, or where punctuation is
hard, as in the writings of Heracleitus. To punctuate Heracleitus
is no easy task, because we often cannot tell whether a particular
word belongs to what precedes or what follows it. Thus, at the
outset of his treatise he says, ’Though this truth is always men
understand it not’, where it is not clear with which of the two
clauses the word ’always’ should be joined by the punctuation.
Further, the following fact leads to solecism, viz. that the sentence
does not work out properly if you annex to two terms a third which
www.bocc.ubi.pt
148 Aristotle
does not suit them both. Thus either ’sound’ or ’colour’ will fail
to work out properly with some verbs: ’perceive’ will apply to
both, ’see’ will not. Obscurity is also caused if, when you intend
to insert a number of details, you do not ﬁrst make your meaning
clear; for instance, if you say, ’I meant, after telling him this, that
and the other thing, to set out’, rather than something of this kind
’I meant to set out after telling him; then this, that, and the other
thing occurred.’
6
The following suggestions will help to give your language im-
pressiveness. (1) Describe a thing instead of naming it: do not say
’circle’, but ’that surface which extends equally from the middle
every way’. To achieve conciseness, do the opposite-put the name
instead of the description. When mentioning anything ugly or un-
seemly, use its name if it is the description that is ugly, and des-
cribe it if it is the name that is ugly. (2) Represent things with
the help of metaphors and epithets, being careful to avoid poetical
effects. (3) Use plural for singular, as in poetry, where one ﬁnds
Unto havens Achaean,
though only one haven is meant, and
Here are my letter’s many-leaved folds.
(4) Do not bracket two words under one article, but put one ar-
ticle with each; e.g. ’that wife of ours.’ The reverse to secure con-
ciseness; e.g. ’our wife.’ Use plenty of connecting words; con-
versely, to secure conciseness, dispense with connectives, while
still preserving connexion; e.g. ’having gone and spoken’, and
’having gone, I spoke’, respectively. (6) And the practice of Anti-
machus, too, is useful-to describe a thing by mentioning attributes
it does not possess; as he does in talking of Teumessus
There is a little wind-swept knoll...
A subject can be developed indeﬁnitely along these lines. You
may apply this method of treatment by negation either to good
or to bad qualities, according to which your subject requires. It
is from this source that the poets draw expressions such as the
www.bocc.ubi.pt
Rhetoric 149
’stringless’ or ’lyreless’ melody, thus forming epithets out of ne-
gations. This device is popular in proportional metaphors, as
when the trumpet’s note is called ’a lyreless melody’.
7
Your language will be appropriate if it expresses emotion and
character, and if it corresponds to its subject. ’Correspondence to
subject’ means that we must neither speak casually about weighty
matters, nor solemnly about trivial ones; nor must we add orna-
mental epithets to commonplace nouns, or the effect will be co-
mic, as in the works of Cleophon, who can use phrases as absurd
as ’O queenly ﬁg-tree’. To express emotion, you will employ the
language of anger in speaking of outrage; the language of disgust
and discreet reluctance to utter a word when speaking of impiety
or foulness; the language of exultation for a tale of glory, and that
of humiliation for a tale of and so in all other cases.
This aptness of language is one thing that makes people be-
lieve in the truth of your story: their minds draw the false con-
clusion that you are to be trusted from the fact that others behave
as you do when things are as you describe them; and therefore
they take your story to be true, whether it is so or not. Besides,
an emotional speaker always makes his audience feel with him,
even when there is nothing in his arguments; which is why many
speakers try to overwhelm their audience by mere noise.
Furthermore, this way of proving your story by displaying
these signs of its genuineness expresses your personal character.
Each class of men, each type of disposition, will have its own ap-
propriate way of letting the truth appear. Under ’class’ I include
differences of age, as boy, man, or old man; of sex, as man or wo-
man; of nationality, as Spartan or Thessalian. By ’dispositions’ I
here mean those dispositions only which determine the character
of a man’s for it is not every disposition that does this. If, then,
a speaker uses the very words which are in keeping with a parti-
cular disposition, he will reproduce the corresponding character;
for a rustic and an educated man will not say the same things nor
www.bocc.ubi.pt
150 Aristotle
speak in the same way. Again, some impression is made upon an
audience by a device which speech-writers employ to nauseous
excess, when they say ’Who does not know this?’ or ’It is known
to everybody.’ The hearer is ashamed of his ignorance, and agrees
with the speaker, so as to have a share of the knowledge that eve-
rybody else possesses.
All the variations of oratorical style are capable of being used
in season or out of season. The best way to counteract any exagge-
ration is the well-worn device by which the speaker puts in some
criticism of himself; for then people feel it must be all right for
him to talk thus, since he certainly knows what he is doing. Fur-
ther, it is better not to have everything always just corresponding
to everything else-your hearers will see through you less easily
thus. I mean for instance, if your words are harsh, you should
not extend this harshness to your voice and your countenance and
have everything else in keeping. If you do, the artiﬁcial character
of each detail becomes apparent; whereas if you adopt one device
and not another, you are using art all the same and yet nobody
notices it. (To be sure, if mild sentiments are expressed in harsh
tones and harsh sentiments in mild tones, you become compara-
tively unconvincing.) Compound words, fairly plentiful epithets,
and strange words best suit an emotional speech. We forgive an
angry man for talking about a wrong as ’heaven-high’ or ’colos-
sal’; and we excuse such language when the speaker has his he-
arers already in his hands and has stirred them deeply either by
praise or blame or anger or affection, as Isocrates, for instance,
does at the end of his Panegyric, with his ’name and fame’ and ’in
that they brooked’. Men do speak in this strain when they are de-
eply stirred, and so, once the audience is in a like state of feeling,
approval of course follows. This is why such language is ﬁtting in
poetry, which is an inspired thing. This language, then, should be
used either under stress of emotion, or ironically, after the manner
of Gorgias and of the passages in the Phaedrus.
www.bocc.ubi.pt
Rhetoric 151
8
The form of a prose composition should be neither metrical
nor destitute of rhythm. The metrical form destroys the hearer’s
trust by its artiﬁcial appearance, and at the same time it diverts
his attention, making him watch for metrical recurrences, just as
children catch up the herald’s question, ’Whom does the freedman
choose as his advocate?’, with the answer ’Cleon!’ On the other
hand, unrhythmical language is too unlimited; we do not want
the limitations of metre, but some limitation we must have, or
the effect will be vague and unsatisfactory. Now it is number that
limits all things; and it is the numerical limitation of the forms of a
composition that constitutes rhythm, of which metres are deﬁnite
sections. Prose, then, is to be rhythmical, but not metrical, or
it will become not prose but verse. It should not even have too
precise a prose rhythm, and therefore should only be rhythmical
to a certain extent.
Of the various rhythms, the heroic has dignity, but lacks the
tones of the spoken language. The iambic is the very language of
ordinary people, so that in common talk iambic lines occur oftener
than any others: but in a speech we need dignity and the power of
taking the hearer out of his ordinary self. The trochee is too much
akin to wild dancing: we can see this in tetrameter verse, which
is one of the trochaic rhythms.
There remains the paean, which speakers began to use in the
time of Thrasymachus, though they had then no name to give it.
The paean is a third class of rhythm, closely akin to both the two
already mentioned; it has in it the ratio of three to two, whereas
the other two kinds have the ratio of one to one, and two to one
respectively. Between the two last ratios comes the ratio of one-
and-a-half to one, which is that of the paean.
Now the other two kinds of rhythm must be rejected in writing
prose, partly for the reasons given, and partly because they are too
metrical; and the paean must be adopted, since from this alone of
the rhythms mentioned no deﬁnite metre arises, and therefore it
is the least obtrusive of them. At present the same form of paean
www.bocc.ubi.pt
152 Aristotle
is employed at the beginning a at the end of sentences, whereas
the end should differ from the beginning. There are two opposite
kinds of paean, one of which is suitable to the beginning of a
sentence, where it is indeed actually used; this is the kind that
begins with a long syllable and ends with three short ones, as
Dalogenes | eite Luki | an,
and
Chruseokom | a Ekate | pai Dios.
The other paean begins, conversely, with three short syllables
and ends with a long one, as
meta de lan | udata t ok | eanon e | oanise nux.
This kind of paean makes a real close: a short syllable can
give no effect of ﬁnality, and therefore makes the rhythm appear
truncated. A sentence should break off with the long syllable: the
fact that it is over should be indicated not by the scribe, or by his
period-mark in the margin, but by the rhythm itself.
We have now seen that our language must be rhythmical and
not destitute of rhythm, and what rhythms, in what particular
shape, make it so.
9
The language of prose must be either free-running, with its
parts united by nothing except the connecting words, like the pre-
ludes in dithyrambs; or compact and antithetical, like the stro-
phes of the old poets. The free-running style is the ancient one,
e.g. ’Herein is set forth the inquiry of Herodotus the Thurian.’
Every one used this method formerly; not many do so now. By
’free-running’ style I mean the kind that has no natural stopping-
places, and comes to a stop only because there is no more to say
of that subject. This style is unsatisfying just because it goes on
indeﬁnitely-one always likes to sight a stopping-place in front of
one: it is only at the goal that men in a race faint and collapse;
while they see the end of the course before them, they can keep
on going. Such, then, is the free-running kind of style; the com-
pact is that which is in periods. By a period I mean a portion of
www.bocc.ubi.pt
Rhetoric 153
speech that has in itself a beginning and an end, being at the same
time not too big to be taken in at a glance. Language of this kind
is satisfying and easy to follow. It is satisfying, because it is just
the reverse of indeﬁnite; and moreover, the hearer always feels
that he is grasping something and has reached some deﬁnite con-
clusion; whereas it is unsatisfactory to see nothing in front of you
and get nowhere. It is easy to follow, because it can easily be re-
membered; and this because language when in periodic form can
be numbered, and number is the easiest of all things to remember.
That is why verse, which is measured, is always more easily re-
membered than prose, which is not: the measures of verse can be
numbered. The period must, further, not be completed until the
sense is complete: it must not be capable of breaking off abruptly,
as may happen with the following iambic lines of Sophocles-
Calydon’s soil is this; of Pelops’ land
(The smiling plains face us across the strait.)
By a wrong division of the words the hearer may take the me-
aning to be the reverse of what it is: for instance, in the passage
quoted, one might imagine that Calydon is in the Peloponnesus.
A Period may be either divided into several members or sim-
ple. The period of several members is a portion of speech (1)
complete in itself, (2) divided into parts, and (3) easily delivered
at a single breath-as a whole, that is; not by fresh breath being
taken at the division. A member is one of the two parts of such
a period. By a ’simple’ period, I mean that which has only one
member. The members, and the whole periods, should be neit-
her curt nor long. A member which is too short often makes the
listener stumble; he is still expecting the rhythm to go on to the
limit his mind has ﬁxed for it; and if meanwhile he is pulled back
by the speaker’s stopping, the shock is bound to make him, so to
speak, stumble. If, on the other hand, you go on too long, you
make him feel left behind, just as people who when walking pass
beyond the boundary before turning back leave their companions
behind So too if a period is too long you turn it into a speech,
or something like a dithyrambic prelude. The result is much like
www.bocc.ubi.pt
154 Aristotle
the preludes that Democritus of Chios jeered at Melanippides for
writing instead of antistrophic stanzas-
He that sets traps for another man’s feet
Is like to fall into them ﬁrst;
And long-winded preludes do harm to us all,
But the preluder catches it worst.
Which applies likewise to long-membered orators. Periods
whose members are altogether too short are not periods at all; and
the result is to bring the hearer down with a crash.
The periodic style which is divided into members is of two
kinds. It is either simply divided, as in ’I have often wondered at
the conveners of national gatherings and the founders of athletic
contests’; or it is antithetical, where, in each of the two members,
one of one pair of opposites is put along with one of another pair,
or the same word is used to bracket two opposites, as ’They aided
both parties-not only those who stayed behind but those who ac-
companied them: for the latter they acquired new territory larger
than that at home, and to the former they left territory at home that
was large enough’. Here the contrasted words are ’staying behind’
and ’accompanying’, ’enough’ and ’larger’. So in the example,
’Both to those who want to get property and to those who desire
to enjoy it’ where ’enjoyment’ is contrasted with ’getting’. Again,
’it often happens in such enterprises that the wise men fail and the
fools succeed’; ’they were awarded the prize of valour immedia-
tely, and won the command of the sea not long afterwards’; ’to sail
through the mainland and march through the sea, by bridging the
Hellespont and cutting through Athos’; ’nature gave them their
country and law took it away again’; ’of them perished in misery,
others were saved in disgrace’; ’Athenian citizens keep foreigners
in their houses as servants, while the city of Athens allows her al-
lies by thousands to live as the foreigner’s slaves’; and ’to possess
in life or to bequeath at death’. There is also what some one said
about Peitholaus and Lycophron in a law-court, ’These men used
to sell you when they were at home, and now they have come to
you here and bought you’. All these passages have the structure
www.bocc.ubi.pt
Rhetoric 155
described above. Such a form of speech is satisfying, because
the signiﬁcance of contrasted ideas is easily felt, especially when
they are thus put side by side, and also because it has the effect of
a logical argument; it is by putting two opposing conclusions side
by side that you prove one of them false.
Such, then, is the nature of antithesis. Parisosis is making the
two members of a period equal in length. Paromoeosis is making
the extreme words of both members like each other. This must
happen either at the beginning or at the end of each member. If
at the beginning, the resemblance must always be between whole
words; at the end, between ﬁnal syllables or inﬂexions of the same
word or the same word repeated. Thus, at the beginning
agron gar elaben arlon par’ autou
and
dorhetoi t epelonto pararretoi t epeessin
At the end
ouk wethesan auton paidion tetokenai,
all autou aitlon lelonenai,
and
en pleiotals de opontisi kai en elachistais elpisin
An example of inﬂexions of the same word is
axios de staoenai chalkous ouk axios on chalkou;
Of the same word repeated,
su d’ auton kai zonta eleges kakos kai nun grafeis kakos.
Of one syllable,
ti d’ an epaoes deinon, ei andrh’ eides arhgon;
It is possible for the same sentence to have all these featu-
res together-antithesis, parison, and homoeoteleuton. (The pos-
sible beginnings of periods have been pretty fully enumerated in
the Theodectea.) There are also spurious antitheses, like that of
Epicharmus-
There one time I as their guest did stay,
And they were my hosts on another day.
www.bocc.ubi.pt
156 Aristotle
10
We may now consider the above points settled, and pass on to
say something about the way to devise lively and taking sayings.
Their actual invention can only come through natural talent or
long practice; but this treatise may indicate the way it is done. We
may deal with them by enumerating the different kinds of them.
We will begin by remarking that we all naturally ﬁnd it agreeable
to get hold of new ideas easily: words express ideas, and therefore
those words are the most agreeable that enable us to get hold of
new ideas. Now strange words simply puzzle us; ordinary words
convey only what we know already; it is from metaphor that we
can best get hold of something fresh. When the poet calls ’old
age a withered stalk’, he conveys a new idea, a new fact, to us
by means of the general notion of bloom, which is common to
both things. The similes of the poets do the same, and therefore,
if they are good similes, give an effect of brilliance. The simile,
as has been said before, is a metaphor, differing from it only in
the way it is put; and just because it is longer it is less attractive.
Besides, it does not say outright that ’this’ is ’that’, and therefore
the hearer is less interested in the idea. We see, then, that both
speech and reasoning are lively in proportion as they make us
seize a new idea promptly. For this reason people are not much
taken either by obvious arguments (using the word ’obvious’ to
mean what is plain to everybody and needs no investigation), nor
by those which puzzle us when we hear them stated, but only by
those which convey their information to us as soon as we hear
them, provided we had not the information already; or which the
mind only just fails to keep up with. These two kinds do convey
to us a sort of information: but the obvious and the obscure kinds
convey nothing, either at once or later on. It is these qualities,
then, that, so far as the meaning of what is said is concerned,
make an argument acceptable. So far as the style is concerned, it
is the antithetical form that appeals to us, e.g. ’judging that the
peace common to all the rest was a war upon their own private
interests’, where there is an antithesis between war and peace. It
www.bocc.ubi.pt
