Poincare, Henri. Science and Method (1908). Translated by Francis Maitland.

I. 
THE SELECTION OF FACTS. 
ToLSTOI explains somewhere in his writings why, in 
his opinion, " Science for Science's sake " is an absurd 
conception. We cannot know all the facts, since they 
are practically infinite in number. We must make a 
selection ; and that being so, can this selection be 
governed by the mere caprice of our curiosity? Is 
it not better to be guided by utility, by our practical, 
and more ~specially our moral, necessities? Have we 
not some better occupation than counting the number 
of lady-birds in existence on this planet? 
It is clear that for him the word utility has not the 
meaning assigned to it by business men, and, after 
them, by the greater number of our contemporaries. 
He cares but little for the industrial applications of 
science, for the marvels of electricity or of auto­
mobilism, which he regards rather as hindrances to 
moral progress. For him the useful is exclusively 
what is capable of making men better. 
It is hardly necessary for me to state that, for my 
part, I could not be satisfied with either of these 
ideals. I have no liking either for a greedy and 
narrow plutocracy, or for a virtuous unaspmng 
democracy, solely occupied in turning the other

r6 SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
cheek, in which we should find good people devoid of 
curiosity, who, avoiding all excesses, would not die 
of any disease-save boredom. But it is all a matter 
of taste, and that is not the point I wish to discuss. 
None the less the question remains, and it claims 
our attention. lf our selection is only determined by 
caprice or by immediate necessity, there qm be no 
science for science's sake, and consequently no science. 
Is this true? There is no disputing the fact that a 
selection must be made : however great our activity, 
facts outstrip us, and we can never overtake them; 
while the scientist is discovering one fact, millions 
and millions are produced in every cubic inch of his 
body. Trying to make science contain nature is like 
trying to make the part contain the whole. 
But scientists believe that there is a hierarchy 
of facts, and that a judicious selection can be made. 
They are right, for otherwise there would be no science, 
and science does exist. One has only to open one's 
eyes to see that the triumphs of industry, which have 
enriched so many practical men, would never have 
seen the light if only these practical men had existed, 
and if they had not been preceded by disinterested 
fools who died poor, who never thought of the useful, 
and yet had a guide that' was not their own caprice. 
What these fools did, as Mach has said, was to save 
their successors the trouble of thinking. If they had 
worked solely in view of an immediate application, 
they would have left nothing behind them, and in face 
of a new requirement, all would have had to be done 
again. Now the majority of men do not like thinking, 
and this is perhaps a good thing, since instinct guides 
them, and very often better than reason would guide

THE SELECTION OF FACTS. 17 
a pure intelligence, at least whenever they are pursuing 
an end that is immediate and always the same. But 
instinct is. routine, and if it were not fertilized by 
thought, it would advance no further with man than 
with the bee or the ant It is necessary, therefore, to 
think for those who do not like thinking, and as they 
are many, each one of our thoughts must be useful 
in as many circumstances as possible. For this 
reason, the more general a law is, the greater is its 
value. 
This shows us how our selection should be made. 
The most interesting facts are those which can be 
used several times, those which have a chance of 
recurring. We have been fortunate enough to be born 
in a world where there are such facts. Suppose that 
instead of eighty chemical elements we had eighty 
millions, and that they were not some common and 
others rare, but uniformly distributed. Then each 
time we picked up a new pebble there would be a 
strong probability that it was composed of some un­
known· substance. Nothing that we knew of other 
pebbles would tell us anything about it. Before each 
new object we should be like a new-born child ; like 
him we could but obey our caprices or our necessities. 
In such a world there would be no science, perhaps 
thought and even life would be impossible, since 
evolution could not have developed the instincts of 
self-preservation. Providentially it is not so; but this 
blessing, like all those to which we are accustomed, is 
not appreciated at its true value. The biologist would 
be equally embarrassed if there were only individuals 
and no species, and if heredity did not make children 
resemble their parents.

I8 SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
Which, then, are the facts that have a chance of 
recurring? In the first place, simple facts. It is 
evident that in a complex fact many circumstances 
are united by chance, and that only a still more 
improbable chance could ever so unite them again. 
But are there such things as simple facts? and if there 
are, how are we to recognize them ? Who can tell 
that what we believe to be simple does not conceal 
an alarming complexity? All that we can say is 
that we must prefer facts which appear simple, to 
those in which our rude vision detects dissimilar 
elements. Then only two alternatives are possible; 
either this simplicity is real, or else the elements 
are so intimately mingled that they do not admit of 
being distinguished. In the first case we have a 
chance of meeting the same simple fact again, either 
in all its purity, or itself entering as an element into 
some complex whole. In the second case the intimate 
mixture has similarly a greater chance of being re­
produced than a heterogeneous assemblage. Chance 
can mingle, but it cannot unmingle, and a combination 
of various elements in a well-ordered edifice in which 
something can be distinguished, can only be made 
deliberately. There is, therefore, but little chance that 
an assemblage in which different things can be dis­
tinguished should ever be reproduced. On the other 
hand, there is great probability that a mixture which 
appears homogeneous at first sight will be reproduced 
several times. Accordingly facts which appear simple, 
even if they are not so in reality, will be more easily 
brought about again by chance. 
It is this that justifies the method instinctively 
adopted by scientists, and what perhaps justifies it

THE SELECTION OF FACTS. rg 
still better is that facts which occur frequently appear 
to us simple just because we are accustomed to 
them. 
But where is the simple fact? Scientists have tried 
to find it in the two extremes, in the infinitely great 
and in the infinitely small. The astronomer has found 
it because the distances of the stars are immense, so 
great that each of them appears only as a point and 
qualitative differences disappear, and because a point 
is simpler than a body which has shape and qualities. 
The physicist, on the other hand, has sought the 
elementary phenomenon in an imaginary division of 
bodies into infinitely small atoms, because the con­
ditions of the problem, which undergo slow and con­
tinuous variations as we pass from one point of the 
body to another, may be regarded as constant within 
each of these little atoms. Similarly the biologist has 
been led instinctively to regard the cell as more interest­
ing than the whole animal, and the event has proved 
him right, since cells belonging to the most diverse 
organisms have greater resemblances, for those who can 
recognize them, than the organisms themselves. The 
sociologist is in a more embarrassing position. The 
elements, which for him are men, are too dissimilar, too 
variable, too capricious, in a word, too complex them­
selves. Furthermore, history does not repeat itself; 
how, then, is he to select the interesting fact, the fact 
which is repeated? Method is precisely the selection 
of facts, and accordingly our first care must be to 
devise a method. Many have been devised because 
none holds the field undisputed. Nearly every socio­
logical thesis proposes a new method, which, however, 
its author is very careful not to apply, so that sociology

20 SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
is the science with the greatest number of methods 
and the least results. 
It is with regular facts, therefore, that we ought to 
begin ; but as soon as the rule is well established, as 
soon as it is no longer in doubt, the facts which are in 
complete conformity with it lose their interest, since 
they can teach us nothing new. Then it is the excep­
tion which becomes important. We cease to look for 
resemblances, and apply ourselves before all else to 
differences, and of these differences we select first 
those that are most accentuated, not only because 
they are the most striking, but because they will be 
the most instructive. This will be best explained by a 
simple example. Suppose we are seeking to determine 
a curve by observing some of the points on it. The 
practical man who looked only to immediate utility 
would merely observe the points he required for some 
special object ; these points would be badly distributed 
on the curve, they would be crowded together in cer­
tain parts and scarce in others, so that it would be 
impossible to connect them by a continuous line, and 
they would be useless for any other application. The 
scientist would proceed in a different manner. Since 
he wishes to study the curve for itself, he will distribute 
the points to be observed regularly, and as soon as he 
knows some of them, he will join them by a regular 
line, and he will then have the complete curve. But 
how is he to accomplish this? If he has determined 
one extreme point on the curve, he will not remain 
close to this extremity, but will move to the other end. 
After the two extremities, the central point is the most 
instructive, and so on. 
Thus when a rule has been established, we have first

THE SELECTION OF FACTS. 21 
to look for the cases in which the rule stands the best 
chance of being found in fault. This is one of many 
reasons for the interest of astronomical facts and of 
geological ages. By making long excursions in 
space or in time, we may find our ordinary rules 
completely upset, and these great upsettings will give 
us . a clearer view and better comprehension of such 
small changes as may occur nearer us, in the small 
corner of the world in which we are called to live and 
move. We shall know this corner better for the 
journey we have taken into distant lands where we 
had no concern. 
But what we must aim at is not so much to ascertain 
resemblances and differences, as to discover similarities 
hidden under apparent discrepancies. The individual 
rules appear at first discordant, but on looking closer 
we can generally detect a resemblance; though differ­
ing in matter, they approximate in form and in the 
order of their parts. When we examine them from 
tlys point of view, we shall see them widen and tend 
to embrace everything. This is what gives a value to 
certain facts that come to complete a whole, and 
show that it is the faithful image of other known 
wholes. 
I cannot dwell further on this point, but these few 
words will suffice to show that the scientist does not 
make a random selection of the facts to be observed. 
He does not count lady-birds, as Tolstoi says, because 
the number of these insects, interesting as they are, is 
subject to capricious variations. He tries to condense 
a great deal of experience and a great deal of thought 
into a small volume, and that is why a little book on 
physics contains so many past experiments, and a

22 SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
thousand times as many possible ones, whose results 
are known in advance. 
But so far we have only considered one side of the 
question. The scientist does not study nature because 
it is useful to do so. He studies it because he takes 
pleasure in it, and he takes pleasure in it because it is 
beautiful. If nature were not beautiful it would not be 
worth knowing, and life would not be worth living. I 
am not speaking, of course, of that beauty which 
strikes the senses, of the beauty of qualities and ap­
pearances. I am far from despising this, but it has 
nothing to do with science. What I mean is that 
more intimate beauty which comes from the harmo­
nious order of its parts, and which a pure intelligence 
can grasp. It is this that gives a body a skeleton, 
so to speak, to the shimmering visions that flatter 
our senses, and without this support the beauty 
of these fleeting dreams would be imperfect, because 
it would be indefinite and ever elusive. Intellectual 
beauty, on the contrary, is self-sufficing, and it is for 
it, more perhaps than for the future good of humanity, 
that the scientist condemns himself to long and painful 
labours. 
It is, then, the search for this special beauty, the 
sense of the harmony of the world, that makes us 
select the facts best suited to contribute to this har­
mony; just as the artist selects those features of his 
sitter which complete the portrait and give it character 
and life. And there is no fear that this instinctive 
and unacknowledged preoccupation will divert the 
scientist from the search for truth. We may dream 
of a harmonious world, but how far it will fall short 
of the real world! The Greeks, the greatest artists

THE SELECTION OF FACTS. 23 
that ever were, constructed a heaven for themselves ; 
how poor a thing it is beside the heaven as we know it! 
It is because simplicity and vastness are both beau­
tiful that we seek by preference simple facts and vast 
facts ; that we take delight, now in following the giant 
courses of the stars, now in scrutinizing with a micro­
scope that prodigious smallness which is also a vastness, 
and now in seeking in geological ages the traces of a 
past that attracts us because of its remoteness. 
Thus we see that care for the beautiful leads us to 
the same selection as care for the useful. Similarly 
economy of thought, that economy of effort which, 
according to Mach, is the constant tendency of science, 
is a source of beauty as well as a practical advantage. 
The buildings we admire are those in which the archi­
tect has succeeded in proportioning the means to the 
end, in which the columns seem to carry the burdens 
imposed on them lightly and without effort, like the 
graceful caryatids of the Erechtheum. 
Whence comes this concordance? Is it merely 
that things which seem to us beautiful are those 
which are best adapted to our intelligence, and that 
consequently they are at the same time the tools that 
intelligence knows best how to handle? Or is it due 
rather to evolution and· natural selection? Have the 
peoples whose ideal conformed best to their own in­
terests, properly understood, exterminated the others 
and taken their place? One and all pursued their 
ideal without considering the consequences, but while 
this pursuit led some to their destruction, it gave 
empire to others. We are tempted to believe this, 
for if the Greeks triumphed over the barbarians, and 
if Europe, heir of the thought of the Greeks, dominates

24 SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
the world, it is due to the fact that the savages loved 
garish colours and the blatant noise of the drum, which 
appealed to their senses, while the Greeks loved the 
intellectual beauty hidden behind sensible beauty, and 
that it is this beauty which gives certainty and strength 
to the intelligence. 
No doubt Tolstoi would be horrified at such a 
triumph, and he would refuse to admit that it could 
be truly useful. But this disinterested pursuit of truth 
for its own beauty is also wholesome, and can make 
men better. I know very well there are disappoint­
ments, that the thinker does not always find the 
serenity he should, and even that some scientists have 
thoroughly bad tempers. 
Must we therefore say that science should be 
abandoned, and morality alone be studied ? Does 
any one suppose that moralists themselves are entirely 
above reproach when they have come down from the 
pulpit?

III. 
MATHEMATICAL DISCOVERY. 
THE genesis of mathematical discovery is a problem 
which must inspire the psychologist with the keenest 
interest For this is the process in which the human 
mind seems to borrow least from the exterior world, 
in which it acts, or appears to act, only by itself and 
on itself, so that by studying the process of geometric 
thought we may hope to arrive at what is most 
essential in the human mind. 
This has long been understood, and a few months 
ago a review called /' Enseignement M athematique, 
edited by MM. Laisant and Fehr, instituted an en­
quiry into the habits of mind and methods of work 
of different mathematicians. I had outlined the 
principal features of this article when the results of 
the enquiry were published, so that I have hardly been 
able to make any use of them, and I will content 
myself with saying that the majority of the evidence 
confirms my conclusions. I do not say there is 
unanimity, for on an appeal to universal suffrage we 
cannot hope .to obtain unanimity. 
One first ··fact must astonish us, or rather would 
astonish us if we were not too much accustomed to 
it How does it happen that there are people who

MATHEMATICAL DISCOVERY. 47 
do not understand mathematics? If the science 
invokes only the rules of logic, those accepted by 
all well-formed minds, if its evidence is founded on 
principles that are common to all men, and that none 
but a madman would attempt to deny, how does it 
happen that there are so many people who are 
entirely impervious to it? 
There is nothing mysterious in the fact that every 
one is not capable of discovery. That every one 
should not be able to retain a demonstration he has 
once learnt is still comprehensible. But what does 
seem most surprising, when we consider it, is that 
any one should be unable to understand a mathe­
matical argument at the very moment it is stated to 
him. And yet those who can only follow the argu­
ment with difficulty are in a majority ; this is incon­
testable, and the experience of teachers of secondary 
education will certainly not contradict me. 
And still further, how is error possible in mathe­
matics? A healthy intellect should not be guilty 
of any error in logic, and yet there are very keen 
minds which will not make a false step in a short 
argument such as those we have to make in the 
ordinary actions of life, which yet are incapable of 
following or repeating without error the demonstra­
tions of mathematics which are longer, but which 
are, after all, only accumulations of short arguments 
exactly analogous to those they make so easily. Is it 
necessary to add that mathematicians themselves are 
not infallible? 
The answer appears to me obvious. Imagine a 
long series of syllogisms in which the conclusions of 
those that precede form the premises of those that

SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
follow. We shall be capable of grasping each of the 
syllogisms, and it is not in the passage from premises 
to conclusion that we are in danger of going astray. 
But between the moment when we meet a proposition 
for the first time as the conclusion of one syllogism, 
and the moment when we find it once more as the 
premise of another syllogism, much time will some­
times have elapsed, and we shall have unfolded many 
links of the chain; accordingly it may well happen 
that we shall have forgotten it, or, what is more serious, 
forgotten its meaning. So we may chance to replace 
it by a somewhat different proposition, or to preserve 
the same statement but give it a slightly different 
meaning, and thus we are in danger of falling into 
error. 
A mathematician must often use a rule, and, natur­
ally, he begins by demonstrating the rule. At the 
moment the demonstration is quite fresh in his 
memory he understands perfectly its meaning and 
significance, and he is in no danger of changing it. 
But later on he commits it to memory, and only 
applies it in a mechanical way, and then, if his 
memory fails him, he may apply it wrongly. It is 
thus, to take a simple and almost vulgar example, 
that we sometimes make mistakes in calculation, 
because we have forgotten our multiplication table. 
On this view special aptitude for mathematics 
would be due to nothing but a very certain memory 
or a tremendous power of attention. It would be a 
quality analogous to that of the whist player who 
can remember the cards played, or, to rise a step 
higher, to that of the chess player who can picture 
a very great number of combinations and retain them

MATHEMATICAL DISCOVERY. 49 
in his memory. Every good mathematician should 
also be a good chess player and vice versa, and 
similarly he should be a good numerical calculator. 
Certainly this sometimes happens, and thus Gauss 
was at once a geometrician of genius and a very 
precocious and very certain calculator. 
But there are exceptions, or rather I am wrong, 
for I cannot call them exceptions, otherwise the excep­
tions would be more numerous than the cases of con­
formity with the rule. On the contrary, it was Gauss 
who was an exception. As for myself, I must confess 
I am absolutely incapable of doing an addition sum 
without a mistake. Similarly I should be a very bad 
chess player. I could easily calculate that by playing 
in a certain way I should be exposed to such and 
such a danger ; I should then review many other 
moves, which I should reject for other reasons, and 
I should end by making the move I first examined, 
having forgotten in the interval the danger I had 
foreseen·. 
In a word, my memory is not bad, but it would be 
insufficient to make me a good chess player. Why, 
then, does it not fail me in a difficult mathematical 
argument in which the majority of chess players 
would be lost? Clearly because it is guided by the 
general trend of the argument. A mathematical 
demonstration is not a simple juxtaposition of syl­
logisms ; it consists of syllogisms placed in a certain 
order, and the order in which these elements are 
placed is much more important than the elements 
themselves. If I have the feeling, so to speak the 
intuition, of this order, so that I can perceive the 
whole of the argument at a glance, I need no longer

50 SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
be afr::tid of forgetting one of the elements ; each of 
them will place itself naturally in the position pre­
pared for it, without my having to make any effort 
of memory. 
It seems to me, then, as I repeat an argument I 
have learnt, that I could have discovered it. This 
is often only art illusion; but even then, even if I am 
not clever enough to create for myself, I rediscover 
it myself as I repeat it. 
We can understand that this feeling, this intuition 
of mathematical order, which enables us to guess 
hidden harmonies and relations, cannot belong to 
every one. Some have neither this delicate feeling 
that is difficult to define, nor a power of memory and 
attention above the common, and so they are abso­
lutely incapable of understanding even the first steps 
of higher mathematics. This applies to the majority 
of people. Others have the feeling only in a slight 
degree, but they are gifted with an uncommon 
memory and a great capacity for attention. They 
learn the details one after the other by heart, they 
can understand mathemathics and sometimes apply 
them, but they are not in a condition to create. 
Lastly, others possess the special intuition I have 
spoken of more or less highly developed, and they 
can not only understand mathematics, even though 
their memory is in no way extraordinary, but they 
can become creators, and seek to make discovery 
with more or less chance of success, according as their 
intuition is more or less developed. 
What, in fact, is mathematical discovery? It does 
not consist in making new combinations with mathe­
matical entities that are already known. That can

MATHEMATICAL DISCOVERY. 5I 
be done by any one, and the combinations that could 
be so formed would be infinite in number, and the 
greater part of them would be absolutely devoid of 
interest. Discovery consists precisely in not con­
structing useless combinations, but in constructing 
those that are useful, which are an infinitely small 
minority. Discovery is discernment, selection. 
How this selection is to be made I have explained 
above. Mathematical facts worthy of being studied 
are those which, by their analogy with other facts, 
are capable of conducting us to the knowledge of a 
mathematical law, in the same way that experimental 
facts conduct us to the knowledge of a physical law. 
They are those which reveal unsuspected relations 
between other facts, long since known, but wrongly 
believed to be unrelated to each other. 
Among the combinations we choose, the most fruit­
ful are often those which are formed of elements 
borrowed from widely separated domains. I do not 
mean to say that for discovery it is sufficient to bring 
together objects that are as incongruous as possible. 
The greater part of the combinations so formed would 
be entirely fruitless, but some among them, though 
very rare, are the most fruitful of all. 
Discovery, as I have said, is selection. But this is 
perhaps not quite the right word. It suggests a pur­
chaser who has been shown a large number of samples, 
and examines them one after the other in order to 
make his selection. In our case the samples would be 
so numerous that a whole life would not give sufficient 
time to examine them. Things do not happen in this 
way. Unfruitful combinations do not so much as 
present themselves to the mind of the discoverer. In

52 SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
the field of his consciousness there never appear any 
but really useful combinations, and some that he 
rejects, which, however, partake to some extent of 
the character of useful combinations. Everything 
happens as if the discoverer were a secondary examiner 
who had OrfY to interrogate candidates declared eli­
gible after passing a preliminary test. 
But what I have said up to now is only what can 
be observed or inferred by reading the works of 
geometricians, provided they are read with some 
reflection. 
It is time to penetrate further, and to see what 
happens in the very soul of the mathematician. For 
this purpose I think I cannot do better than recount 
my personal recollections. Only I am going to confine 
myself to relating how I wrote my first treatise on 
Fuchsian functions. I must apologize, for I am going 
to introduce some technical expressions, but they need 
not alarm the reader, for he has no need to under­
stand them. I shall say, for instance, that I found the 
demonstration of such and such a theorem under such 
and such circumstances; the theorem will have a 
barbarous name that many will not know, but that 
is of no importance. What is interesting for the 
psychologist is not the theorem but the circumstances. 
For a fortnight I had been attempting to prove 
that there could not be any function analogous to 
what I have since called Fuchsian functions. I was at 
that time very ignorant. Every day I sat down at my 
table and spent an hour or two trying a great number 
of combinations, and I arrived at no result. One 
night I took some black coffee, contrary to my custom, 
and was unable to sleep. A host of ideas kept surging

MATHEMATICAL DISCOVERY. 53 
in my head; I could almost feel then jostling one 
another, until two of them coalesced, so to speak, to 
form a stable combination. When morning came, I 
had established the existence of one class of Fuchsian 
functions, those that are derived from the hyper­
geometric series. I had only to verify the results, 
which only took a few hours. 
Then I wished to represent these functions by the 
quotient of two series. This idea was perfectly con­
scious and deliberate ; I was guided by the analogy 
with elliptical functions. I asked myself what must 
be the properties of these series, if they existed, and 
I succeeded without difficulty in forming the series 
that I have called Theta-Fuchsian. 
At this moment I left Caen, where I was then living, 
to take part in a geological conference arranged by 
the School of Mines. The incidents of the journey 
made me forget my mathematical work. When we 
arrived at Coutances, we got into a break to go 
for a drive, and, just as I put my foot on the 
step, the idea came to me, though nothing in my 
former thoughts seemed to have prepared me for it, 
that the transformations I had used to define Fuchsian 
functions were identical with those of non-Euclidian 
geometry. I made no verification, and had no time to 
do so, since I took up the conversation again as soon 
as I had sat down in the break, but I felt absolute 
certainty at once. When I got back to Caen I verified 
the result at my leisure to satisfy my conscience. 
I then began to study arithmetical questions without 
any great apparent result, and without suspecting that 
they could have the least connexion with my previous 
researches. Disgusted at my want of success, I went

54 SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
4' 
away to spend a few days at the seaside, and 
thought of entirely different things. One day, as I 
was walking on the cliff, the idea came to me, again 
with the sam~ characteristics of conciseness, sudden­
ness, and immediate certainty, that arithmetical trans­
formations of indefinite ternary quadratic forms are 
identical with those of non-Euclidian geometry. 
Returning to Caen, I reflected on this result and 
deduced its consequences. The example of quadratic 
forms showed me that there are Fuchsian groups 
other than those which correspond with the hyper­
geometric series ; I saw that I could apply to them 
the theory of the Theta-Fuchsian series, and that, 
consequently, there are Fuchsian functions other than 
those which are derived from the hypergeometric series, 
the only ones I knew up to that time. Naturally, I 
proposed to form all these functions. I laid siege 
to them systematically and captured all the outworks 
one after the other. There was one, however, which 
still held out, whose fall would carry with it that of the 
central fortress. But all my efforts were of no avail at 
first, except to make me better understand the difficulty, 
which was already something. All this work was per­
fectly conscious. 
Thereupon I left for Mont- Valerien, where I had 
to serve my time in the army, and so my mind was 
preoccupied with very different matters. One day, as 
I was crossing the street, the solution of the difficulty 
which had brought me to a standstill came to me 
all at once. I did not try to fathom it immediately, 
and it was only after my service was finished that 
I returned to the question. I had all the elements, 
and had only to assemble and arrange them. Accord-

MATHEMATICAL DISCOVERY. 55 
ingly I composed my definitive treatise at a sitting 
and without any difficulty. 
It is useless to multiply examples, and I will con­
tent myself with this one alone. As regards my other 
researches, the accounts I should give would be exactly 
similar, and the observations related by other mathe­
maticians in the enquiry of l'Ensez"gnement Mathe­
matz"que would only confirm them. 
One is at once struck by these appearances of 
sudden illumination, obvious indications of a long 
course of previous unconscious work. The part played 
by this unconscious work in mathematical discovery 
seems to me indisputable, and we shall find traces 
of it in other cases where it is less evident. Often 
when a man is working at a difficult question, he 
accomplishes nothing the first time he sets to work. 
Then he takes more or less of a rest, and sits down 
again at his table. During the first half-hour he still 
finds nothing, and then all at once the decisive idea 
presents itself to his mind. We might say that the 
conscious work proved more fruitful because it was 
interrupted and the rest restored force and freshness 
to the mind. But it is more probable that the rest 
was occupied with unconscious work, and that the 
result of this work was afterwards revealed to the 
geometrician exactly as in the cases I have quoted, 
except that the revelation, instead of coming to light 
during a walk or a journey, came during a period 
of conscious work, but independently of that work, 
which at most only performs the unlocking process, 
as if it were the spur that excited into conscious form 
the results already acquired during the rest, which till 
then remained unconscious.

SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
There is another remark to be made regarding 
the conditions of this unconscious work, which is, that 
it is not possible, or in any case not fruitful, unless 
it is first preceded and then followed by a perioq 
of conscious work These sudden inspirations are 
never produced (and this is sufficiently proved already 
by the examples I have quoted) except after some 
days of voluntary efforts which appeared absolutely 
fruitless, in which one thought one had accomplished 
nothing, and seemed to be on a totally wrong track. 
These efforts, however, were not as barren as one 
thought ; they set the unconscious machine in motion, 
and without them it would not have worked at all, 
and would not have produced anything. 
The necessity for the second period of conscious 
work can be even more readily understood. It is 
necessary to work out the results of the inspiration, 
to deduce the immediate consequences and put them 
in order and to set out the demonstrations ; but, above 
all, it is necessary to verify them. I have spoken 
of the feeling of absolute certainty which accompanies 
the inspiration ; in the cases quoted this feeling was 
not deceptive, and more often than not this will be 
the case. But we must beware of thinking that this 
is a rule without exceptions. Often the feeling de­
ceives us without being any less distinct on that 
account, and we only detect it when we attempt to 
establish the demonstration. I have observed this 
fact most notably with regard to ideas that have come 
to me in the morning or at night when I have been 
in bed in a semi-somnolent condition. 
Such are the facts of the case, and they suggest the 
following reflections. The result of all that precedes

MATHEMATICAL DISCOVERY. 57 
is to show that the unconscious ego, or, as it is called, 
the subliminal ego, plays a most important part 
in mathematical discovery. But the subliminal ego 
is generally thought of as purely automatic. Now we 
have seen that mathematical work is not a simple 
mechanical work, and that it could not be entrusted 
to any machine, whatever the degree of perfection we 
suppose it to have been brought to. It is not merely 
a question of applying certain rules, of manufacturing 
as many combinations as possible according to certain 
fixed laws. The combinations so obtained would 
be extremely numerous, useless, and encumbering. 
The real work of the discoverer consists in choosing 
between these combinations with a view to eliminating 
those that are useless, or rather not giving himself 
the trouble of making them at all. The rules which 
must guide this choice are extremely subtle and 
delicate, and it is practically impossible to state them 
in precise language; they must be felt rather than for­
mulated. Under these conditions, how can we imagine 
a sieve capable of applying them mechanically? 
The following, then, presents itself as a first hypoth­
esis. The subliminal ego is in no way inferior to the 
conscious ego; it is not purely automatic; it is capable 
of discernment ; it has tact and lightness of touch ; 
it can select, and it can divine. More than that, 
it can divine better than the conscious ego, since 
it succeeds where the latter fails. In a word, is not 
the subliminal ego superior to the conscious ego? 
The importance of this question will be readily 
understood. In a recent lecture, M. Boutroux showed 
how it had arisen on entirely different occasions, and 
what consequences would be involved by an answer

58 SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
in the affirmative. (See also the same author's 
Scz"ence et Religion, pp. 3 I 3 et seq.) 
Are we forced to give this affirmative answer by 
the facts I have just stated? I confess that, for my 
part, I should be loth to accept it. Let us, then, 
return to the facts, and see if they do not admit of 
some other explanation. 
It is certain that the combinations which present 
themselves to the mind in a kind of sudden illumina­
tion after a somewhat prolonged period of unconscious 
work are generally useful and fruitful combinations, 
which appear to be the result of a preliminary sifting. 
Does it follow from this that the subliminal ego, 
having divined by a delicate intuition that these 
combinations could be useful, has formed none but 
these, or has it formed a great many others which 
were devoid of interest, and remained unconscious? 
Under this second aspect, all the combinations are 
formed as a result of the automatic action of the 
subliminal ego, but those only which are interesting 
find their way into the field of consciousness. This, too, 
is most mysterious. How can we explain the fact that, 
of the thousand products of our unconscious activity, 
some are invited to cross the threshold, while others 
remain outside? Is it mere chance that gives them 
this privilege? Evidently not. For instance, of 
all the excitements of our senses, it is only the most 
intense that retain our attention, unless it has been 
directed upon them by other causes. More commonly 
the privileged unconscious phenomena, those that are 
capable of becoming conscious, are those which, 
directly or indirectly, most deeply affect our sen­
sibility.

MATHEMATICAL DISCOVERY. 59 
It may appear surprising that sensibility should 
be introduced in connexion with mathematical de­
monstrations, which, it would seem, can only interest 
the intellect. But not if we bear in mind the feeling 
of mathematical beauty, of the harmony of numbers 
and forms and of geometric elegance. It is a real 
::esthetic feeling that all true mathematicians recognize, 
and this is truly sensibility. 
Now, what are the mathematical entities to which 
we attribute this character of beauty and elegance, 
which are capable of developing in us a kind of 
::esthetic emotion? Those whose elements are har­
moniously arranged so that the mind can, without 
effort, take in the whole without neglecting the details. 
This harmony is at once a satisfaction to our ::esthetic 
requirements, and an assistance to the mind which 
it supports and guides. At the same time, by setting 
before our eyes a well-ordered whole, it gives us 
a presentiment of a mathematical law. Now, as I 
have said above, the only mathematical facts worthy 
of retaining our attention and capable of being useful 
are those which can make us acquainted with a 
mathematical law. Accordingly we arrive at the 
following conclusion. The useful combinations are 
precisely the most beautiful, I mean those that can 
most charm that special sensibility that all mathe­
maticians know, but of which laymen are so ignorant 
that they are often tempted to smile at it. 
What follows, then? Of the very large number of 
combinations which the subliminal ego blindly forms, 
almost all are without interest and without utility. 
But, for that very reason, they are without action on 
the ::esthetic sensibility; the consciousness will never

6o SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
know them. A few only are harmonious, and con­
sequently at once useful and beautiful, and they 
will be capable of affecting the geometrician's special 
sensibility I have been speaking of; which, once 
aroused, will direct our attention upon them, and will 
thus give them the opportunity of becoming conscious. 
This is only a hypothesis, and yet there is an 
observation which tends to confirm it. When a 
sudden illumination invades the mathematician's mind, 
it most frequently happens that it does not mislead 
him. But it also happens sometimes, as I have said, 
that it will not stand the test of verification. Well, 
it is to be observed almost always that this false idea, 
if it had been correct, would have flattered our natural 
instinct for mathematical elegance. 
Thus it is this special cesthetic sensibility that plays 
the part of the delicate sieve of which I spoke above, 
and this makes it ~ufficiently clear why the man who 
has it not will never be a real discoverer. 
All the difficulties, however, have not disappeared. 
The conscious ego is strictly limited, but as regards 
the subliminal ego, we do not know its limitations, 
and that is why we are not too loth to suppose 
that in a brief space of time it can form more 
different combinations than could be comprised in 
the whole life of a conscient being. These limitations 
do exist, however. Is it conceivable that it can form 
all the possible combinations, whose number staggers 
the imagination? Nevertheless this would seem to be 
necessary, for if it produces only a small portion of the 
combinations, and that by chance, there will be very 
small likelihood of the right one, the one that must be 
selected, being found among them.

MATHEMATICAL DISCOVERY. 6r 
Perhaps we must look for the explanation in that 
period of preliminary conscious work which always 
precedes all fruitful unconscious work. If I may 
be permitted a crude comparison, let us represent the 
future elements of our combinations as something 
resembling Epicurus's hooked atoms. When the mind 
is in complete repose these atoms are immovable; 
they are, so to speak, attached to the wall. This com­
plete repose may continue indefinitely without the 
atoms meeting, and, consequently, without the pos­
sibility of the formation of any combination. 
On the other hand, during a period of apparent 
repose, but of unconscious work, some of them are 
detached from the wall and set in motion. They 
plough through space in all directions, like a swarm 
of gnats, for instance, or, if we prefer a more learned 
comparison, like the gaseous molecules in the kinetic 
theory of gases. Their mutual collisions may then 
produce new combinations. 
What is the part to be played by the preliminary 
conscious work? Clearly it is to liberate some of 
these atoms, to detach them from the wall and set 
them in motion. We think we have accomplished 
nothing, when we have stirred up the elements in a 
thousand different ways to try to arrange them, and 
have not succeeded in finding a satisfactory arrange­
ment. But after this agitation imparted to them by 
our will, they do not return to their original repose, 
but continue to circulate freely. 
Now our will did not select them at random, but 
in pursuit of a perfectly definite aim. Those it has 
liberated are not, therefore, chance atoms; they are 
those from which we may rea<onably expect the

6z SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
desired solution. The liberated atoms will then 
experience collisions, either with each other, or with 
the atoms that have remained stationary, which 
they will run against in their course. I apologize 
once more. My comparison is very crude, but I 
cannot well see how I could explain my thought 
in any other way. 
However it be, the only combinations that have 
any chance of being formed are those in which one 
at least of the elements is one of the atoms deliber­
ately selected by our will. Now it is evidently 
among these that what I called just now the right 
combination is to be found. Perhaps there is here 
a means of modifying what was paradoxical in the 
original hypothesis. 
Yet another observation. It never happens that 
unconscious work supplies ready-made the result of 
a lengthy calculation in which we have only to apply 
fixed rules. It might be supposed that the sub­
liminal ego, purely automatic as it is, was peculiarly 
fitted for this kind of work, which is, in a sense, ex­
clusively mechanical. It would seem that, by think­
ing overnight of the factors of a multiplication sum, 
we might hope to find the product ready-made for 
us on waking; or, again, that an algebraical calcula­
tion, for instance, or a verification could be made 
unconsciously. Observation proves that such is by no 
means the case. All that we can hope from these 
inspirations, which are the fruits of unconscious 
work, is to obtain points of departure for such 
calculations. As for the calculations themselves, 
they must be made in the second period of conscious 
work which follows the inspiration, and in which

MATHEMATICAL DISCOVERY. 63 
the results of the inspiration are verified and the 
consequences deduced. The rules of these calcula­
tions are strict and complicated ; they demand disci­
pline, attention, will, and consequently consciousness. 
In the subliminal ego, on the contrary, there reigns 
what I would call liberty, if one could give this 
name to the mere absence of discipline and to dis­
order born of chance. Only, this very disorder permits 
of unexpected couplings. 
I will make one last remark. When I related 
above some personal observations, I spoke of a night 
of excitement, on which I worked as though in spite 
of myself. The cases of this are frequent, and it is 
not necessary that the abnormal cerebral activity 
should be caused by a physical stimulant, as in the 
case quoted. Well, it appears that, in these cases, 
we are ourselves assisting at our own unconscious 
work, which becomes partly perceptible to the over­
excited consciousness, but does not on that account 
change its nature. We then become vaguely aware 
of what distinguishes the two mechanisms, or, if you 
will, of the methods of working of the two egos. 
The psychological observations I have thus suc­
ceeded in making appear to me, in their general 
characteristics, to confirm the views I have been 
enunciating. 
Truly there is great need of this, for in spite of 
everything they are and remain largely hypothetical. 
The interest of the question is so great that I do 
not regret having submitted them to the reader.

I. 
THE RELATIVITY OF SPACE. 
I. 
IT is impossible to picture empty space. All our 
efforts to imagine pure space from which the changing 
images of material objects are excluded can only 
result in a representation in which highly-coloured 
surfaces, for instance, are replaced by lines of slight 
colouration, and if we continued in this direction to the 
end, everything would disappear and end in nothing. 
Hence arises the irreducible relativity of space. 
Whoever speaks of absolute space uses a word de­
void of meaning. This is a truth that has been long 
proclaimed by all who have reflected on the question, 
but one which we are too often inclined to forget. 
If I am at a definite point in Paris, at the Place 
du Pantheon, for instance, and I say, "I will come 
back here to-morrow;" if I am asked," Do you mean 
that you will come back to the same point in space?" 
I should be tempted to answer yes. Yet I should 
be wrong, since between now and to-morrow the earth 
will have moved, carrying with it the Place du Pan­
theon, which will have travelled more than a million 
miles. And if I wished to speak more accu-rately, I 
should gain nothing, since this million of miles has

94 SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
been covered by our globe in its motion in relation 
to the sun, and the sun in its turn moves in relation 
to the Milky Way, and the Milky Way itself is no 
doubt in motion without our being able to recognize 
its velocity. So that we are, and shall always be, 
completely ignorant how far the Place du Pantheon 
moves in a day. In fact, what I meant to say was, 
"To-morrow I shall see once more the dome and 
pediment of the Pantheon," and if there was no 
Pantheon my sentence would have no meaning and 
space would disappear. 
This is one of the most commonplace forms of the 
principle of the relativity of space, but there is another 
on which Delbeuf has laid particular stress. Suppose 
that in one night all the dimensions of the universe 
became a thousand times larger. The world will 
remain sz'mz'lar to itself, if we give the word similz'tude 
the meaning it has in the third book of Euclid. 
Only, what was formerly a metre long will now measure 
a kilometre, and what was a millimetre long will 
become a metre. The bed in which I went to sleep 
and my body itself will have grown in the same 
proportion. When I wake in the morning what will 
be my feeling in face of such an astonishing trans­
formation? Well, I shall not notice anything at all. 
The most exact measures will be incapable of revealing 
anything of this tremendous change, since the yard­
measures I shall use will have varied in exactly the 
same proportions as the objects I shall attempt to 
measure. In reality the change only exists for those 
who argue as if space were absolute. If I have argued 
for a moment as they do, it was only in order to make 
it clearer that their view implies a contradiction. In

THE RELATIVITY OF SPACE. 95 
reality it would be better to say that as space is 
relative, nothing at all has happened, and that it is 
for that reason that we have noticed nothing. 
Have we any right, therefore, to say that we know 
the distance between two points? No, since that 
distance could undergo enormous variations without 
our being able to perceive it, provided other distances 
varied in the same proportions. We saw just now 
that when .I say I shall be here to-morrow, that does 
not mean that to-morrow I shall be at the point in 
space where I am to-day, but that to-morrow I shall 
be at the same distance from the Pantheon as I am 
to-day. And already this statement is not sufficient, 
and I ought to say that to-morrow and to-day my 
distance from the Pantheon will be equal to the same 
number of times the length of my body. 
But that is not all. I imagined the dimensions of 
the world changing, but at least the world remaining 
always similar to itself. We can go much further than 
that, and one of the most surprising theories of modern 
physicists will furnish the occasion. According to 
a hypothesis of Lorentz and Fitzgerald,* all bodies 
carried forward in the earth's motion undergo a de­
formation. This deformation is, in truth, very slight, 
since all dimensions parallel with the earth's motion 
are diminished by a hundred-millionth, while dimen­
sions perpendicular to this motion are not altered. 
But it matters little that it is slight ; it is enough 
that it should exist for the conclusion I am soon 
going to draw from it Besides, though I said that 
it is slight, I reall~' know nothing about it. I have 
myself fallen a victim to the tenacious illusion that 
* Vide infi·a, Book Ill. Chap. ii.

g6 SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
makes us believe that we think of an absolute space. 
I was thinking of the earth's motion on its elliptical 
orbit round the sun, and I allowed 18 miles a second 
for its velocity. But its true velocity (I mean this 
time, not its absolute velocity, which has no sense, 
but its velocity in relation to the ether), this I do not 
know and have no means of knowing. It is, perhaps, 
10 or 100 times as high, and then the deformation 
will be 100 or 10,000 times as great. 
It is evident that we cannot demonstrate this de­
formation. Take a cube with sides a yard long. It 
is deformed on account of the earth's velocity; one 
of its sides, that parallel with the motion, becomes 
smaller, the others do not vary. If I wish to assure 
myself of this with the help of a yard-measure, I shall 
measure first one of the sides perpendicular to the 
motion, and satisfy myself that my measure fits this 
side exactly ; and indeed neither one nor other of 
these lengths is altered, since they are both perpendic­
ular to the motion. I then wish to measure the other 
side, that parallel with the motion ; for this purpose 
I change the position of my measure, and turn it so 
as to apply it to this side. But the yard-measure, 
having changed its direction and having become paral­
lel with the motion, has in its turn undergone the 
deformation, so that, though the side is no longer a 
yard long, it will stiii fit it exactly, and I shall be 
aware of nothing. 
What, then, I shall be asked, is the use of the 
hypothesis of Lorentz and Fitzgerald if no experiment 
can enable us to verify it? The fact is that my state­
ment has been incomplete. I have only spoken of 
measurements that can be made with a yard-measure,

THE RELATIVITY OF SPACE. 97 
but we can also measure a distance by the time that 
light takes to traverse it, on condition that we admit 
that the velocity of light is constant, and independent 
of its direction. Lorentz could have accounted for the 
facts by supposing that the velocity of light is greater 
in the direction of the earth's motion than in the 
perpendicular direction. He preferred to admit that 
the velocity is the same in the two directions, but that 
bodies are smaller in the former than in the latter. If 
the surfaces of the waves of light had undergone the 
same deformations as material bodies, we should never 
have perceived the Lorentz-Fitzgerald deformation. 
In the one case as in the other, there can be no 
question of absolute magnitude, but of the meas­
urement of that magnitude by means of some instru­
ment. This instrument may be a yard-measure or 
the path traversed by light. It is only the relation 
of the magnitude to the instrument that we measure, 
and if this relation is altered, we have no means of 
knowing whether it is the magnitude or the instrument 
that has changed. 
But what I wish to make clear is, that in this 
deformation the world has not remained similar to 
itself. Squares have become rectangles or parallel­
ograms, circles ellipses, and spheres ellipsoids. And 
yet we have no means of knowing whether this de­
formation is real. 
It is clear that we might go much further. Instead 
of the Lorentz-Fitzgerald deformation, with its ex­
tremely simple laws, we might imagine a deformation 
of any kind whatever ; bodies might be deformed in 
accordance with any laws, as complicated as we liked, 
and we should not perceive it, provided all bodies

9~ SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
without exception were deformed in accordance with 
the same laws.' When I say all bodies without excep­
tion, I include, of course, our own bodies and the rays 
of light emanating from the different objects. 
If we look at the world in one of those mirrors 
of complicated form which deform objects in an odd 
way, the mutual relations of the different parts of the 
world are not altered ; if, in fact, two real objects 
touch, their images likewise appear to touch. In truth, 
when we look in such a mirror we readily perceive the 
deformation, but it is because the real world exists 
beside its deformed image. And even if this real 
world were hidden from us, there is something which 
cannot be hidden, and that is ourselves. We cannot 
help seeing, or at least feeling, our body and our 
members which have not been deformed, and continue 
to act as measuring instruments. But if we imagine 
our body itself deformed, and in the same way as if 
it were seen in the mirror, these measuring instruments 
will fail us in their turn, and the deformation will 
no longer be able to be ascertained. 
Imagine, in the same way, two universes which are 
the image one of the other. With each object P in 
the universe A, there corresponds, in the universe B, 
an object P1 which is its image. The co-ordinates 
of this image P1 are determinate functions of those 
of the object P; moreover, these functions may be 
of any kind whatever-! assume only that they are 
chosen once for all. Between the position of P and 
that of P1 there is a constant relation ; it matters little 
what that relation may be, it is enough that it should 
be constant. 
Well, these two universes will be indistinguishable.

THE RELATIVITY OF SPACE. 99 
I mean to say that the former will be for its inhab­
itants what the second is for its own. This would 
be true so long as the two universes remained foreign 
to one another. Suppose we are inhabitants of the 
universe A ; we have constructed our science and 
particularly our geometry. During this time the in­
habitants of the universe B have constructed a science, 
and as their world is the image of ours, their geometry 
will also be the image of ours, or, more accurately, 
it will be the same. But if one day a window were to 
open for us upon the universe B, we should feel 
contempt for them, and we should say, "These 
wretched people imagine that they have made a 
geometry, but what they so name is only a grotesque 
image of ours ; their straight lines are all twisted, 
their circles are hunchbacked, and their spheres have 
capricious inequalities." We should have no suspicion 
that they were saying the same of us, and that no 
one will ever know which is right. 
We see in how large a sense we must understand 
the relativity of space. Space is in reality amorphous, 
and it is only the things that are in it that give it 
a form. What are we to think, then, of that direct 
intuition we have of a straight line or of distance? 
We have so little the intuition of distance in itself 
that, in a single night, as we have said, a distance 
could become a thousand times greater without our 
being able to perceive it, if all other distances had 
undergone the same alteration. And in a night the 
universe B might even be substituted for the universe 
A without our having any means of knowing it, and 
then the straight lines of yesterday would have ceased 
to be straight, and we should not be aware of anything.

Ioo SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
One part of space is not by itself and in the absolute 
sense of the word equal to another part of space, for 
if it is so for us, it will not be so for the inhabitants of 
the universe B, and they have precisely as much right 
to reject our opinion as we have to condemn theirs. 
I have shown elsewhere what are the consequences 
of these facts from the point of view of the idea that 
we should construct non-Euclidian and other analogous 
geometries. I do not wish to return to this, and 
I will take a somewhat different point of view. 
II. 
If this intuition of distance, of direction, of the 
straight line, if, in a word, this direct intuition of space 
does not exist, whence comes it that we imagine 
we have it? If this is only an illusion, whence comes 
it that the illusion is so tenacious? This is what 
we must examine. There is no direct intuition of 
magnitude, as we have said, and we can only arrive 
at the relation of the magnitude to our measuring 
instruments. Accordingly we could not have con­
structed space if we had not had an instrument 
for measuring it. Well, that instrument to which we 
refer everything, which we use instinctively, is our 
own body. It is in reference to our own body that we 
locate exterior objects, and the only special relations 
of these objects that we can picture to ourselves are 
their relations with our body. It is our body that 
serves us, so to speak, as a system of axes of 
co-ordinates. 
For instance, at a moment a the presence of an 
object A is revealed to me by the sense of sight ; at 
another moment /3 the presence of another object

THE RELATIVITY OF SPACE. ror 
B is revealed by another sense, that, for instance, 
of hearing or of touch. I judge that this object B 
occupies the same place as the object A. What does 
this mean? To begin with, it does not imply that 
these two objects occupy, at two different moments, 
the same point in an absolute space, which, even 
if it existed, would escape our knowledge, since 
between the moments a and f3 the solar system has 
been displaced and we cannot know what this dis­
placement is. It means that these two objects occupy 
the same relative position in reference to our body. 
But what is meant even by this? The impressions 
that have come to us from these objects have followed 
absolutely different paths-the optic nerve for the 
object A, and the acoustic nerve for the object B ; 
they have nothing in common from the qualitative 
point of view. The representations we can form of 
these two objects are absolutely heterogeneous and 
irreducible one to the other. Only I know that, 
in order to reach the object A, I have only to extend 
my right arm in a certain way ; even though I refrain 
from doing it, I represent to myself the muscular and 
other analogous sensations which accompany that 
extension, and that representation is associated with 
that of the object A. 
Now I know equally that I can reach the object B 
by extending my right arm in the same way, an 
extension accompanied by the same train of muscular 
sensations. And I mean nothing else but this when 
I say that these two objects occupy the same 
position. 
I know also that I could have reached the object A 
by another appropriate movement of the left arm,

roz SCIENCE ANb METHOD. 
and I represent to myself the muscular sensations that 
would have accompanied the movement And by 
the same movement of the left arm, accompanied 
by the same sensations, I could equally have reached 
the object B. 
And this is very important, since it is in this 
way that I could defend myself against the dangers 
with which the object A or the object B might threaten 
me. With each of the blows that may strike us, 
nature has associated one or several parries which 
enable us to protect ourselves against them. The 
same parry may answer to several blows. It is 
thus, for instance, that the same movement of the 
right arm would have enabled us to defend our­
selves at the moment a against the object A, and 
at the moment f3 against the object B. Similarly, tFte 
same blow may be parried in several ways, and we 
have said, for instance, that we could reach the object 
A equally well either by a certain movement of the 
right arm, or by a certain movement of the left. 
All these parries have nothing in common with one 
another, except that they enable us to avoid the same 
blow, and it is that, and nothing but that, we 
mean when we say that they are movements ending 
in the same point in space. Similarly, these objects, 
of which we say that they occupy the same point in 
space, have nothing in common, except that the same 
parry can enable us to defend ourselves against them. 
Or, if we prefer it, let us imagine innumerable 
telegraph wires, some centripetal and others centri­
fugal. The centripetal wires warn us of accidents 
that occur outside, the centrifugal wires have to 
provide the remedy. Connexions are established

THE RELATIVITY OF SPACE. ro3 
in such a way that when one of the centripetal wires 
is traversed by a current, this current acts on a central 
exchange, and so excites a current in one of the 
centrifugal wires, and matters are so arranged that 
several centripetal wires can act on the same centri­
fugal wire, if the same remedy is applicable to several 
evils, and that one centripetal wire can disturb several 
centrifugal wires, either simultaneously or one in 
default of the other, every time that the same evil 
can be cured by several remedies. 
It is this complex system of associations, it is this 
distribution board, so to speak, that is our whole 
geometry, or, if you will, a:ll that is distinctive in our 
geometry. What we call our intuition of a straight 
line or of distance is the consciousness we have of 
these associations and of their imperious character. 
Whence this imperious character itself comes, it 
is easy to understand. The older an association is, 
the more indestructible it will appear to us. But 
these associations are not, for the most part, conquests 
made by the individual, since we see traces of them 
in the newly-born infant; they are conquests made 
by the race. The more necessary these conquests 
were, the more quickly they must have been brought 
about by natural selection. 
On this account those we have been speaking 
of must have been among the earliest, since without 
them the defence of the organism would have been 
impossible. As soon as the cells were no longer 
merely in juxtaposition, as soon as they were called 
upon to give mutual assistance to each other, some 
such mechanism as we have been describing must 
necessarily have been organized in order that the

ro4 SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
assistance should meet the danger without mis­
carrying. 
When a frog's head has been cut off, and a drop of 
acid is placed at some point on its skin, it tries 
to rub off the acid with the nearest foot ; and if that 
foot is cut off, it removes it with the other foot Here 
we have, clearly, that double parry I spoke of just now, 
making it possible to oppose an evil by a second 
remedy if the first fails. It is this multiplicity of 
parries, and the resulting co-ordination, that is space. 
We see to what depths of unconsciousness we have 
to descend to find the first traces of these spacial 
associations, since the lowest parts of the nervous 
system alone come into play. Once we have rea­
lized this, how can we be astonished at the resistance 
we oppose to any attempt to dissociate what has been 
so long associated ? Now, it is this very resistance 
that we call the evidence of the truths of geometry. 
This evidence is nothing else than the repugnance we 
feel at breaking with very old habits with which we 
have always got on very well. 
III. 
The space thus created is only a small space that 
noes not extend beyond what my arm can reach, 
and the intervention of memory is necessary to set 
back its limits. There are points that will always 
remain out of my reach, whatever effort I may make 
to stretch out my hand to them. If I were attached 
to the ground, like a sea-polype, for instance, which 
can only extend its tentacles, all these points would 
be outside space, since the sensations we might 
experience from the action of bodies placed there

THE RELATIVITY OF SPACE. 105 
would not be associated with the idea of any move­
ment enabling us to reach them, or with any appro­
priate parry. These sensations would not seem to us 
to have any spacial character, and we should not 
attempt to locate them. 
But we are not fixed to the ground like the inferior 
animals. If the enemy is too far off, we can advance 
upon him first and extend our hand when we are near 
enough. This is still a parry, but a long-distance 
parry. Moreover, it is a complex parry, and into the 
representation we make of it there enter the repre­
sentation of the muscular sensations caused by the 
movement of the legs, that of the muscular sensations 
caused by the final movement of the arm, that of the 
sensations of the semi-circular canals, etc. Besides, we 
have to make a representation, not of a complexus 
of simultaneous sensations, but of a complexus of 
successive sensations, following one another in a deter­
mined order, and it is for this reason that I said just 
now that the intervention of memory is necessary. 
We must further observe that, to reach the same 
point, I can approach nearer the object to be attained, 
in order not to have to extend my hand so far. And 
how much more might be said? It is not one only, but 
a thousand parries I can oppose to the same danger. 
All these parries are formed of sensations that may 
have nothing in common, and yet we regard them 
as defining the same point in space, because they can 
answer to the same danger and are one and all 
of them associated with the notion of that danger. It 
is the possibility of parrying the same blow which 
makes the unity of these different parries, just as 
it is the possibility of being parried in the same way

ro6 SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
which makes the unity of the blows of such different 
kinds that can threaten us from the same point 
in space. It is this double unity that makes the 
individuality of each point in space, and in the notion 
of such a point there is nothing else but this. 
The space I pictured in the preceding section, 
which I might call restricted space, was referred to 
axes of co-ordinates attached to my body. These axes 
were fixed, since my body did not move, and it 
was only my limbs that changed their position. What 
are the axes to which the extended space is naturally 
referred-that is to say, the new space I have just 
defined ? We define a point by the succession of 
movements we require to make to reach it, starting 
from a certain initial position of the body. The axes 
are accordingly attached to this initial position of the 
body. 
But the position I call initial may be arbitrarily 
chosen from among all the positions my body has 
successively occupied. If a more or less unconscious 
memory of these successive positions is necessary for 
the genesis of the notion of space, this memory can go 
back more or less into the past Hence results a 
certain indeterminateness in the very definition of 
space, and it is precisely this indeterminateness which 
constitutes its relativity. 
Absolute space exists no longer; there is only space 
relative to a certain initial position of the body. For 
a conscious being, fixed to the ground like the inferior 
animals, who would consequently only know restricted 
space, space would still be relative, since it would be 
referred to his body, but this being would not be 
conscious of the relativity, because the axes to which

THE RELATIVITY OF SPACE. 107 
he referred this restricted space would not change. 
No doubt the rock to which he was chained would 
not be motionless, since it would be involved in the 
motion of our planet ; for us, consequently, these axes 
would change every moment, but for him they would 
not change. We have the faculty of referring our 
extended space at one time to the position A of our 
body considered as initial, at another to the position 
B which it occupied some moments later, which we 
are free to consider in its turn as initial, and, accord­
ingly, we make unconscious changes in the co-ordinates 
every moment. This faculty would fail our imaginary 
being, and, through not having travelled, he would 
think space absolute. Every moment his system of 
axes would be imposed on him ; this system might 
change to any extent in reality, for him it would be 
always the same, since it would always be the uni'que 
system. It is not the same for us who possess, each 
moment, several systems between which we can choose 
at will, and on condition of going back by memory 
more or less into the past. 
That is not all, for the restricted space would not 
be homogeneous. The different points of this space 
could not be regarded as equivalent, since some could 
only be reached at the cost of the greatest efforts, 
while others could be reached with ease. On the 
contrary, our extended space appears to us homoge­
neous, and we say that all its points are equivalent. 
What does this mean? 
If we start from a certain position A, we can, 
starting from that position, effect certain movements 
M, characterized by a certain complexus of muscular 
sensations. But, starting from another position B,

Io8 SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
we can execute movements M1 which will be char­
acterized by the same muscular sensations. Then let 
a be the situation of a certain point in the body, the 
tip of the forefinger of the right hand, for instance, 
in the initial position A, and let b be the position of 
this same forefinger when, starting from that position 
A, we have executed the movements M. Then let a1 
be the situation of the forefinger in the position B, 
and b1 its situation when, starting from the position 
B, we have executed the movements M1• 
Well, I am in the habit of saying that the points a 
and b are, in relation to each other, as the points a1 
and b\ and that means simply that the two series of 
movements M and M1 are accompanied by the same 
muscular sensations. And as I am conscious that, 
in passing from the position A to the position B, my 
body has remained capable of the same movements, 
I know that there is a point in space which is to the 
point a1 what some point b is to the point a, so that 
the two points a and a1 are equivalent It is this that 
is called the homogeneity of space, and at the same 
time it is for this reason that space is relative, since 
its properties remain the same whether they are 
referred to the axes A or to the axes B. So that the 
relativity of space and its homogeneity are one and 
the same thing. 
Now, if I wish to pass to the great space, which is 
no longer to serve for my individual use only, but in 
which I can lodge the universe, I shall arrive at it by 
an act of imagination. I shall imagine what a giant 
would experience who could reach the planets in a 
few steps, or, if we prefer, what I should feel myself 
in presence of a world in miniature, in which these

THE RELATIVITY OF SPACE. I<>9 
planets would be replaced by little balls, while on 
one of these little balls there would move a Lilliputian 
that I should call myself. But this act of imagination 
would be impossible for me if I had not previously 
constructed my restricted space and my extended 
space for my personal use. 
IV. 
Now we come to the question why all these spaces 
have three dimensions. Let us refer to the " distribu­
tion board" spoken of above. We have, on the one 
side, a list of the different possible dangers-let us 
designate them as Ar, A2, etc.-and, on the other side, 
the list of the different remedies, which I will call in 
the same way Bx, B2, etc. Then we have connexions 
between the contact studs of the first list and those of 
the second in such a way that when, for instance, the 
alarm for danger A3 works, it sets in motion or 
may set in motion the relay corresponding to the 
parry B4 
As I spoke above of centripetal or centrifugal wires, 
I am afraid that all I have said may be taken, not as 
a simple comparison, but as a description of the 
nervous system. Such is not my thought, and that 
for several reasons. Firstly, I should not presume to 
pronounce an opinion on the structure of the nervous 
system which I do not know, while those who have 
studied it only do so with circumspection. Secondly, 
because, in spite of my incompetence, I fully realize 
that this scheme would be far too simple. And lastly, 
because, on my list of parries, there appear some that 
are very complex, which may even, in the case of 
extended space, as we have seen above, consist of

no SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
several steps followed by a movement of the arm. It 
is not a question, then, of physical connexion between 
two real conductors, but of psychological association 
between two series of sensations. 
If AI and A2, for instance, are both of them 
associated with the parry BI, and if AI is similarly 
associated with B2, it will generally be the case that 
A2 and B2 will also be associated. If this fundamental 
law were not generally true, there would only be an 
immense confusion, and there would be nothing that 
could bear any resemblance to a conception of space 
or to a geometry. How, indeed, have we defined a 
point in space? We defined it in two ways : on the 
one hand, it is the whole of the alarms A which are 
in connexion with the same parry B ; on the other, 
it is the whole of the parries B which are in connexion 
with the same alarm A. If our law were not true, we 
should be obliged to say that AI and A2 correspond 
with the same point, since they are both in con­
nexion with BI; but we should be equally obliged 
to say that they do not correspond with the same 
point, since AI would be in connexion with B2, and 
this would not be true of A2-which would be a 
contradiction. 
But from another aspect, if. the law were rigorously 
and invariably true, space would be quite different 
from what it is. We should have well-defined cate­
gories, among which would be apportioned the alarms 
A on the one side and the parries B on the other. 
These categories would be exceedingly numerous, but 
they would be entirely separated one from the other. 
Space would be formed of points, very numerous but 
discrete ; it would be discontinuous. There would be

THE RELATIVITY OF SPACE. III 
no reason for arranging these points in one order 
rather than another, nor, consequently, for attributing 
three dimensions to space. 
But this is not the case. May I be permitted for 
a moment to use the language of those who know 
geometry already? It is necessary that I should do 
so, since it is the language best understood by those 
to whom I wish to make myself clear. When I wish 
to parry the blow, I try to reach the point whence 
the blow comes, but it is enough if I come fairly near 
it. Then the parry BI may answer to AI, and to 
Az if the point which corresponds with BI is sufficiently 
close both to that which corresponds with AI and to 
that which corresponds with Az. But it may happen 
that the point which corresponds with another parry 
Bz is near enough to the point corresponding with 
AI, and not near enough to the point corresponding 
with Az. And so the parry Bz may answer to AI 
and not be able to answer to Az. 
For those who do not yet know geometry, this may 
be translated simply by a modification of the law 
enunciated above. Then what happens is as follows. 
Two parries, BI and B2, are associated with one alarm 
AI, and with a very great number of alarms that we 
will place in the same category as AI, and make to 
correspond with the same point in space. But we 
may find alarms Az which are associated with Bz and 
not with BI, but on the other hand are associated with 
B3, which are not with Ar, and so on in succession, 
so that we may write the sequence 
B1, AI, Bz, Az, B3, A3, B4, A4, 
in which each term is associated with the succeeding

II2 SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
and preceding terms, but not with those that are 
several places removed. 
It is unnecessary to add that each of the terms of 
these sequences is not isolated, but forms part of a 
very numerous category of other alarms or other 
parries which has the same connexions as it, and 
may be regarded as belonging to the same point in 
space. Thus the fundamental law, though admitting 
of exceptions, remains almost always true. Only, in 
consequence of these exceptions, these categories, 
instead of being entirely separate, partially encroach 
upon each other and mutually overlap to a certain 
extent, so that space becomes continuous. 
Furthermore, the order in which these categories 
must be arranged is no longer arbitrary, a'nd a 
reference to the preceding sequence will make it 
clear that B2 must be placed between AI and A2, 
and, consequently, between Bx and B3, and that it 
could not be placed, for instance, between B3 
and B4-
Accordingly there is an order in which our cate­
gories range themselves naturally which corresponds 
with the points in space, and experience teaches us 
that this order presents itself in the form of a three­
circuit distribution board, and it is for this reason 
that space has three dimensions. 
v. 
Thus the characteristic property of space, that of 
having three dimensions, is only a property of our 
distribution board, a property residing, so to speak, 
in the human intelligence. The destruction of some 
of these connexions, that is to say, of these associa-

THE RELATIVITY OF SPACE. II3 
tions of ideas, would be sufficient to give us a dif­
ferent distribution board, and that might be enough 
to endow space with a fourth dimension. 
Some people will be astonished at such a result. 
The exterior world, they think, must surely count 
for something. If the number of dimensions comes 
from the way in which we are made, there might 
be thinking beings living in our world, but made 
differently from us, who would think that space has 
more or less than three dimensions. Has not M. 
de Cyon said that Japanese mice, having only two 
pairs of semicircular canals, think that space has 
two dimensions? Then will not this thinking being, 
if he is capable of constructing a physical system, 
make a system of two or four dimensions, which 
yet, in a sense, will be the same as ours, since it will 
be the description of the same world in another 
language? 
It quite seems, indeed, that it would be possible to 
translate our physics into the language of geometry 
of four dimensions. Attempting such a translation 
would be giving oneself a great deal of trouble for 
little profit, and I will content myself with men­
tioning Hertz's mechanics, in which something of 
the kind may be seen. Yet it seems that the 
translation would always be less simple than the 
text, and. that it would never lose the appearance of 
a translation, for the language of three dimensions 
seems the best suited to the description of our 
world, even though that description may be made, 
in case of necessity, in another idiom. 
Besides, it is not by chance that our distribution 
board has been formed. There is a connexion

II4 SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
between the alarm AI and the parry BI, that is, a 
property residing in our intelligence. But why is 
there this connexion? It is because the parry B I 
enables us effectively to defend ourselves against the 
danger AI, and that is a fact exterior to us, a 
property of the exterior world. Our distribution 
board, then, is only the translation of an assemblage 
of exterior facts ; if it has three dimensions, it is 
because it has adapted itself to a world having 
certain properties, and the most important of these 
properties is that there exist natural solids which 
are clearly displaced in accordance with the laws 
we call laws of motion of unvarying solids. If, then, 
the language of three dimensions is that which 
enables us most easily to describe our world, we 
must not be surprised. This language is founded 
on our distribution board, and it is in order to 
enable us to live in this world that this board has 
been established. 
I have said that we could conceive of thinking 
beings, living in our world, whose distribution board 
would have four dimensions, who would, consequently, 
think in hyperspace. It is not certain, however, that 
such beings, admitting that they were born, would 
be able to live and defend themselves against the 
thousand dangers by which they would be assailed. 
VI. 
A few remarks in conclusion. There is a striking 
contrast between the roughness of this primitive 
geometry which is reduced to what I call a distribu­
tion board, and the infinite precision of the geometry 
of geometricians. And yet the latter is the child of

THE RELATIVITY OF SPACE. II5 
the former, but not of it alone; it required to be 
fertilized by the faculty we have of constructing 
mathematical concepts, such, for instance, as that of 
the group. It was necessary to find among these 
pure concepts the one that was best adapted to 
this rough space, whose genesis I have tried to 
explain in the preceding pages, the space which is 
common to us and the higher animals, 
The evidence of certain geometrical postulates is 
only, as I have said, our unwillingness to give up 
very old habits. But these postulates are infinitely 
precise, while the habits have about them some­
thing essentially fluid. As soon as we wish to think, 
we are bound to have infinitely precise postulates, 
since this is the only means of avoiding contradic­
tion.. But among all the possible systems of postu­
lates, there are some that we shall be unwilling to 
choose, because they do not accord sufficiently with 
our habits. However fluid and elastic these may be, 
they have a limit of elasticity. 
It will be seen that though geometry is not an 
experimental science, it is a science born in con­
nexion with experience ; that we have created the 
space it studies, but adapting it to the world in 
which we live. We have chosen the most con­
venient space, but experience guided our choice. 
As the choice was unconscious, it appears to be 
imposed upon us. Some say that it is imposed by 
experience, and others that we are born with our 
space ready-made. After the preceding considera­
tions, it will be seen what proportion of truth and 
of error there is in these two opinions. 
In this progressive education which has resulted

rr6 SCIENCE AND METHOD. 
in the construction of space, it is very difficult to 
determine what is the share of the individual and 
what of the race. To what extent could one of us, 
transported from his birth into an entirely different 
world, where, for instance, there existed bodies dis­
placed in accordance with the laws of motion of 
non-Euclidian solids-to what extent, I say, would 
he be able to give up the ancestral space in order 
to build up an entirely new space? 
The share of the race seems to preponderate largely, 
and yet if it is to it that we owe the rough space, 
the fluid space of which I spoke just now, the space 
of the higher animals, is it not to the unconscious 
experience of the individual that we owe the in­
finitely precise space of the geometrician? This is 
a question that is not easy of solution. I would 
mention, however, a fact which shows that the space 
bequeathed to us by our ancestors still preserves a 
certain plasticity. Certain hunters learn to shoot 
fish under the water, although the image of these 
fish is raised by refraction ; and, moreover, they do 
it instinctively. Accordingly they have learnt to 
modify their ancient instinct of direction, or, if you 
will, to substitute for the association AI, BI, another 
association AI, B2, because experience has shown 
them that the former does not succeed.

